[1] >> We're experiencing one of the fastest
[2] building booms the world has ever seen.
[3] Described as a global
[4] construction frenzy that shows no signs
[5] of slowing.
[6] Humanity is now dependent on large-scale
[7] data centers and that demand is only
[8] increasing.
[9] But the strain this infrastructure is
[10] placing on our power and water sources
[11] is enormous.
[12] And people are starting to notice.
[13] Many neighboring homeowners say, "Not in
[14] my backyard."
[15] >> That opposition is forcing some tech
[16] giants to rethink where they [snorts]
[17] should build. The data center industry
[18] is actually going to be responsible for
[19] 3-4% of global electricity consumption.
[20] So, that's that's a huge sector. And now
[21] with AI taking our reliance to a whole
[22] new level, this rapidly growing area of
[23] industry is under pressure to clean up
[24] its act and fast.
[25] But with these buildings now consuming
[26] as much energy as entire countries,
[27] what can we actually do about it?
[28] >>
[29] >> This is what a typical data center looks
[30] like in 2026.
[31] And if you live in or close to a major
[32] city, there's a good chance you'll have
[33] one nearby.
[34] Because there are now more than 11,000
[35] of these worldwide across 174 countries.
[36] And unsurprisingly, over a third of them
[37] are in the USA. Some of the largest
[38] clusters are in places you might expect
[39] like Texas and California. But the state
[40] with the most is actually Virginia.
[41] The UK and Germany are way behind in
[42] second and third. And the rest are
[43] pretty well spread around the globe.
[44] Because if they weren't absolutely
[45] everywhere, we wouldn't be able to do
[46] all those things that have become an
[47] essential part of our modern lives.
[48] We don't just mean the important stuff
[49] like online shopping, banking,
[50] or watching epic construction videos on
[51] YouTube. Without data centers, there'd
[52] be no doom scrolling, no long video
[53] calls that really could have been an
[54] email, or memes that just refuse to die.
[55] And we don't miss that. Wouldn't we?
[56] But data centers weren't always
[57] omnipresent. To see how quickly these
[58] structures have been expanding, it's
[59] best to look at it from a different
[60] perspective. After all, we can't do a
[61] video on data centers without digging
[62] into some, well, data.
[63] For starters, take a look at this graph.
[64] It shows the staggering growth in data
[65] centers globally over the past 20 years
[66] in terms of installed capacity.
[67] In other words, the total amount of
[68] power available for all the equipment
[69] needed to run them.
[70] Notice how things went stratospheric
[71] after about 2017.
[72] The overall figure now stands at more
[73] than 122 gigawatts.
[74] Lights, camera, action!
[75] To give you an idea of just how much
[76] that really is, the total capacity of
[77] Hinkley Point C, the massive new
[78] nuclear power plant currently under
[79] construction in the UK,
[80] is around 3.2 gigawatts. That means
[81] you'd need 38 Hinkley Point C sized
[82] nuclear plants to power just the world's
[83] data centers. And they're continuing to
[84] soar in number and size.
[85] What the hell IS HE DOING, MARK?
[86] Before AI, we also had a many, many data
[87] centers. But those data center data
[88] center tend to be much smaller, like
[89] less than 100 megawatts. But today,
[90] a AI data center can easily be 500
[91] megawatts or even more than 1 gigawatt.
[92] So, the concentration of of this large
[93] power demand and other resource demand
[94] like water over small area, that's a big
[95] challenge for the infrastructure. By
[96] 2030, data centers are set to be
[97] consuming more electricity than the
[98] entirety of Japan. That's double what
[99] they were pulling from the grid in 2022.
[100] And as you've just heard, the main
[101] reason for this increase
[102] is the meteoric rise of AI.
[103] Every time you chuck something into
[104] ChatGPT, it kickstarts a process that
[105] uses more electricity and water than
[106] many of us realize.
[107] Just kidding. Other channels trying to
[108] imitate us might do that, but we
[109] certainly don't.
[110] Now, when ChatGPT alone is processing
[111] billions of prompts every day, it's no
[112] wonder the infrastructure that makes it
[113] all happen is having to scale up very
[114] fast. AI systems were responsible for
[115] about 20% of total data center
[116] electricity consumption by the end of
[117] 2024.
[118] Um and that number could have increased
[119] to about half by the end of last year,
[120] 2025.
[121] Altogether, these these numbers are just
[122] becoming really big, really fast. But
[123] keeping up with the demand is where
[124] things get tricky. Data center
[125] construction isn't just about building a
[126] great big hall and filling it with
[127] servers, despite how it might appear in
[128] footage like this.
[129] There's actually a lot more to it than
[130] that, which is why the biggest
[131] facilities being built at the moment are
[132] considered mega projects.
[133] First of all, you've got to decide where
[134] to put them.
[135] Ideally, you want a place with good
[136] fiber connections, water sources, and
[137] for the really large ones that handle
[138] several hundred megawatts on their own,
[139] high capacity power grids. Those data
[140] centers, they they they consume as much
[141] power as entire cities.
[142] And you can't just put those anywhere.
[143] It's It's actually really hard to find
[144] power grids where there is sufficient
[145] capacity to to even start
[146] building a project like that. So, at
[147] that point, power capacity becomes the
[148] number one concern. There would have to
[149] be plenty of space, too. Not just enough
[150] to squeeze the building into.
[151] Many are constructed with expansion in
[152] mind. Expansions that often
[153] follow not long after they're finished
[154] and with rapid speed. The companies
[155] behind them are called hyperscalers for
[156] a reason. Another thing to think about
[157] is climate and geography. Lower
[158] temperatures make it easier to keep
[159] everything cool. And it's generally
[160] better if you build these things away
[161] from places where there are likely to be
[162] extreme weather events or natural
[163] disasters. You see,
[164] just like with other big bits of
[165] infrastructure, if a data center goes
[166] down, it can cause serious problems. I
[167] don't just mean missing out on the
[168] latest TikTok craze. We're talking about
[169] huge financial losses, service failures,
[170] reputational damage,
[171] all the kind of things that every
[172] company absolutely dreads.
[173] Alongside all those racks of equipment
[174] that have to be kept running 24/7,
[175] the cooling system is a key
[176] priority. Usually, this is done in one
[177] of two ways.
[178] There's the traditional method of
[179] circulating cold air into the server
[180] racks, normally through the floor with
[181] waste heat exiting out of the top. While
[182] it's effective, even if some of the air
[183] is recycled, it's a process that
[184] consumes massive amounts of electricity.
[185] Alternatively, you've got liquid
[186] cooling, which is becoming more common
[187] as we enter the AI era. This method
[188] involves using, yes, you guessed it,
[189] liquids like water or coolant to
[190] transfer the heat away, which requires
[191] less electricity and often less space.
[192] But the flip side is that all that water
[193] has to come from somewhere, and that can
[194] cause a pretty big dilemma.
[195] This water is mostly coming from
[196] municipal water supply. And that can be
[197] stressful for a lot of a public water
[198] system, especially in the US.
[199] >>
[200] >> Most of the water systems are small or
[201] medium size. They don't really have a
[202] lot of surplus capacity to supply to
[203] these large-scale
[204] industry users. So, what can be done to
[205] manage these crazy levels of
[206] consumption? Well, many companies are
[207] now prioritizing things like liquid
[208] cooling, investing in their own
[209] renewable sources, and even funding grid
[210] upgrades so they don't push up people's
[211] energy bills.
[212] Others are taking a more unusual
[213] approach, including with some techniques
[214] that are generating quite a bit of
[215] attention.
[216] Several of the world's biggest tech
[217] firms have partnered with nuclear
[218] providers. These deals would see
[219] data centers powered by reliable,
[220] low-carbon sources. Some are even
[221] restarting plants that had
[222] previously been closed or tapping into
[223] technology that still hasn't quite
[224] arrived yet, namely nuclear fusion and
[225] small modular reactors. Alternatively,
[226] you could do what companies in Europe
[227] are doing
[228] and build your data center underground
[229] inside an active mine or a former
[230] bunker. Both of which are great for
[231] security and keeping everything cool.
[232] But these strategies aren't for
[233] everyone, especially companies needing
[234] to deliver high-performance data centers
[235] that are future-proof and super
[236] efficient right now. We're talking about
[237] both new builds and upgrades to existing
[238] ones. For many, investing in atomic
[239] energy or hollowing out a mountain isn't
[240] really a viable option. In fact, meeting
[241] the demands of this new AI-driven era at
[242] the speed required is such a challenge
[243] that it can be hard to know where to
[244] begin. That's where IES can help. IES is
[245] a global leader in a physics-based
[246] building performance simulation
[247] and digital twin technology for all
[248] building types.
[249] With its whole facility approach, users
[250] can monitor and optimize the performance
[251] of their data center projects across its
[252] full life cycle.
[253] >>
[254] >> They can model everything from dynamic
[255] IT loads and rack layouts to advanced
[256] cooling options. All within the
[257] context of the local climate. By
[258] adopting one of IES's AI ready design
[259] strategies, hyperscalers can reach
[260] capacity super fast, de-risk
[261] infrastructure decisions, and reduce
[262] energy, carbon, and water use all while
[263] staying in line with increasingly
[264] stringent regulations and grid
[265] connection requirements. Plus, having an
[266] IES digital twin provides a
[267] performance-focused replica of the
[268] facility that behaves like its real
[269] counterparts, from planning and design
[270] to operation and retrofits.
[271] Then, there's IES's end-to-end
[272] consulting, from a company that's helped
[273] global clients with their digital
[274] infrastructure challenges for more than
[275] 30 years. In fact, IES has already
[276] helped one hyperscaler retrofit an
[277] existing data center with liquid
[278] cooling. It saw them increase capacity
[279] from 10 to 50 kW per rack, cut water use
[280] by 95%
[281] >>
[282] >> and achieve a PUE of 1.16.
[283] Meanwhile, in Ireland, 10 data centers
[284] were able to lower their space cooling
[285] energy loads by around 40% with
[286] support from IES consultants. If you
[287] want to find out more about how dynamic
[288] simulation can enhance existing CFD
[289] modeling to enable high-performance data
[290] centers, then you're in luck.
[291] >>
[292] >> Because IES has just released a brand
[293] new white paper on that very subject.
[294] Inside, you'll learn all the ins and
[295] outs about de-risking AI-driven
[296] facilities and optimizing cooling
[297] strategies, while discovering full case
[298] studies on how others have made it work.
[299] To download the white paper for free
[300] today and see the full extent of IES's
[301] services, just scan the QR code on
[302] screen now or click the link in the
[303] description.
[304] So, we've talked about server racks and
[305] cooling systems, but you're going to
[306] find a lot more inside a data center
[307] than just that.
[308] There are plenty of other components,
[309] some of which might sound quite dull,
[310] but are actually pretty essential.
[311] Security, networking, power
[312] distribution, etc., which all have their
[313] own energy needs.
[314] The trouble is, having these giant
[315] facilities popping up all over the world
[316] can have consequences for the
[317] surrounding infrastructure
[318] and communities.
[319] It's gotten to a point where some people
[320] are starting to oppose these projects,
[321] especially in areas with limited
[322] resources. It always depends on like
[323] what's your local situation, like are
[324] you dealing with water scarcity? Are are
[325] you dealing with drought? And if you
[326] suddenly have a big data center
[327] appearing, that's going to consume a lot
[328] of electricity and there's going to be a
[329] lot of water consumed to
[330] generate all that electricity, that can
[331] really add to your local water stress.
[332] Places with the highest concentrations
[333] of new builds have become hotspots for
[334] resistance.
[335] In Virginia, which now has the nickname
[336] Data Center Alley, at least 25 projects
[337] were reportedly canceled in 2025
[338] following opposition from locals.
[339] Hundreds of data centers used over 2
[340] billion gallons of water here in 2023.
[341] And there have been complaints about
[342] noise and pollution because many of them
[343] are still hooked into power grids that
[344] rely on fossil fuels and have diesel
[345] backup generators.
[346] Elsewhere in the US, others are worried
[347] their energy bills are going to go up
[348] and that not enough is being done to
[349] address the impact.
[350] We are concerned for our public health.
[351] We are concerned for the health of our
[352] local environment. This is going to be a
[353] huge energy drain.
[354] So, my concern is how they're going to
[355] manage that.
[356] >> We are not going to pay double the
[357] amount of our utility bills. Do you
[358] understand that?
[359] As for what the future looks
[360] like, well, as we've already explained,
[361] data centers are only going to get
[362] bigger and more widespread. And it's
[363] happening at a faster rate than anything
[364] we've seen before. Digital
[365] growth is not a new thing. We actually
[366] had that a lot already in the previous
[367] decade,
[368] where streaming and cloud and everything
[369] else was taking off as well. But now,
[370] with AI, we're dealing with a technology
[371] where bigger is better. You can make
[372] this technology and and and the
[373] hardware and software more efficient,
[374] but what it has led to in recent years
[375] is that those efficiency gains have only
[376] been used to make the models even bigger
[377] so they can perform even better,
[378] so they get adopted at an even larger
[379] scale.
[380] So, that's where things really break
[381] apart from what we saw previously.
[382] >>
[383] >> The pushback we're now seeing highlights
[384] how things really do need to change.
[385] While many of these buildings are
[386] appearing almost in people's backyards,
[387] those affected can't be ignored.
[388] Community opposition is a real
[389] challenge. It's a real concern.
[390] We have to address it proactively. We
[391] need to think about how we can
[392] accommodate the new industry demand from
[393] the infrastructure side. For
[394] power, if you have money, you just build
[395] a power plant, but water, you have to
[396] get new water sources. That is naturally
[397] constrained.
[398] And yet, Shaolei believes the recent
[399] media focus on the negative effects of
[400] water use in particular has actually
[401] been a bit overblown because it's not a
[402] major issue everywhere. If there's
[403] enough available to spare, it's still
[404] the best way to tackle that
[405] all-important cooling problem.
[406] The way it is presented in the public
[407] discussion is usually not very accurate.
[408] If you look at some of the data centers,
[409] they are using water
[410] just during the hottest weeks or hottest
[411] days of the year. So, their annual water
[412] usage could be very low, but they use a
[413] lot of water during the summertime. A
[414] better solution to look at water is we
[415] need to use water responsibly. If
[416] there's water, I think the benefits of
[417] using water should not be denied.
[418] Like the technology itself, the
[419] construction of new data centers has
[420] become a
[421] complicated subject. We can't live
[422] without them and they're definitely not
[423] going anywhere. In fact, quite the
[424] opposite of that.
[425] But if we're going to carry on building
[426] these megastructures and build them on a
[427] scale that's bigger and greater than
[428] what we've seen so far,
[429] we really are going to have to work out
[430] a few bugs in the system first.
[431] Once again, if you're looking for some
[432] guidance on how to make a data center
[433] AI-ready and future-proof, make sure you
[434] go and download that white paper. It's
[435] video sponsors like IES that enable us
[436] to keep making these great videos for
[437] you every week, and we'd really
[438] appreciate you guys taking the time to
[439] go and check them out. And as always,
[440] guys, if you enjoyed this video and you
[441] want to get more from the definitive
[442] video channel for construction,
[443] make sure you subscribe to the B1M.