[1] What stands out to you about this
[2] stadium? You might mention the bold
[3] facade or the giant canopy. Or if you're
[4] a resident of Buffalo, New York, you'll
[5] probably mention that you're helping to
[6] pay for it. But if you're a football
[7] fanatic, you'll instantly notice this
[8] looks nothing like any other new NFL
[9] stadium.
[10] Bold, dazzling, almost
[11] otherworldly.
[12] And then there's New Hark, traditional,
[13] utilitarian, and seemingly not out of
[14] place in any major US city 50 years ago.
[15] And while that might sound like the
[16] setup for an insult, trust me, it's not.
[17] With its old school brick detailing and
[18] open to the element style, New Hark
[19] Stadium is a facility that hearkens back
[20] to the venues of yester year. The
[21] question is, why are the Buffalo Bills
[22] building a stadium of the past in 2026?
[23] With its growing global appeal, you
[24] won't be surprised to hear the NFL is
[25] the most financially profitable sports
[26] league on the planet. Just take a look
[27] at the value of its franchises.
[28] According to Forbes, the Dallas Cowboys
[29] top the worldwide polls with a
[30] staggering value of $13 billion US. The
[31] nearest football or soccer team if
[32] you're across the pond is the
[33] mega giant Real Madrid, which ranks 20th
[34] at nearly 7 billion. Of the top 20, an
[35] impressive 13 are NFL franchises. And of
[36] the top 50, 30 are from the NFL. And
[37] there are only 32 teams in the National
[38] Football League. So, you get the
[39] picture. The sport really is rolling in
[40] money. But as the game continues its
[41] rapid ascension and the eyes of the
[42] world start paying more attention to
[43] America's game, no, not that one.
[44] Franchises across the league are under
[45] heaps of pressure to keep up. It's why
[46] new stadiums have been popping up left,
[47] right, and center. The league's newest
[48] stadium set to open in summer 2026 is
[49] New Highark, future home of the Buffalo
[50] Bills. The franchise currently plays at
[51] one of the oldest facilities in the NFL,
[52] the Highark Stadium. Renovating it to be
[53] ready for the modern day would be
[54] extortionate. Real Madrid's stadium
[55] renovation, for example, cost $2
[56] billion. You see, depending on the
[57] amount of work you're doing, you're
[58] basically merging modern amenities into
[59] an old structural skeleton. And that
[60] skeleton itself may need a refresh. So,
[61] a brand new stadium kind of made
[62] more sense. Although, don't go thinking
[63] it comes cheap. New Highark still costs
[64] an eyewashering $2.1 billion. For
[65] context, Allegent, which opened in 2020,
[66] cost around $1.9 billion. Mercedes-Benz,
[67] which opened in 2017, cost about $1.6
[68] billion. And the Sofi Stadium, home to
[69] both the Rams and the Chargers, cost
[70] around 5 billion. What's worth noting is
[71] the massive public investment being put
[72] towards new Highark, a rather unpopular
[73] $850 million thanks to local and state
[74] taxpayers. Should taxpayers be expected
[75] to pick up that kind of a tab? And where
[76] would local and state governments come
[77] up with that kind of cash?
[78] >> It's one of the biggest investments ever
[79] made by the public into an NFL stadium,
[80] and it doesn't even have a roof. The
[81] argument is that a fresh new stadium
[82] adds value to a city. In the long run,
[83] it should deliver financial gains by
[84] attracting visitors to the area for
[85] football matches, gigs, or whatever else
[86] is happening at the stadium. But in
[87] reality, research suggests that these
[88] kind of investments almost never
[89] result in economic gains for a city's
[90] residents. Is that frustrating for
[91] taxpayers with no interest in football?
[92] Yes, absolutely. But until these plans
[93] were confirmed, Buffalo Bills were
[94] looking to leave Buffalo. After all, it
[95] wouldn't be the first team in recent
[96] memory to uproots and make for
[97] supposedly greener pastures. But now
[98] with New Highark, the team will stay in
[99] Buffalo as they have since 1960. In a
[100] car park right across the road from the
[101] current stadium, the new Highark Stadium
[102] is now on the rise.
[103] Now, come the weekend, the NFL season
[104] will be over and we'll have a new Super
[105] Bowl champion. It's a serious accolade
[106] that takes years, if not decades, of
[107] hard work and forward planning. But for
[108] the majority of us who will never
[109] compete at professional sports, it's
[110] still really important to have goals.
[111] Whether it's just to sound more
[112] interesting over dinner, or you want to
[113] finally get to grips with what AI really
[114] means for our planet, there's seriously
[115] no better teacher than today's video
[116] sponsor, Brilliant. With
[117] Brilliant, you don't just come away with
[118] the basics. You earn a deeper
[119] understanding of subjects like maths,
[120] engineering, AI, and science.
[121] It's all delivered using visual aids and
[122] interactive problem solving, so you
[123] actually learn. But let's be honest,
[124] we've all ended up reaching for our
[125] phone or looking out the window to see
[126] what the neighbors order for dinner when
[127] we're meant to be focusing on a task.
[128] But that won't happen with
[129] Brilliant. The app's approach is backed
[130] by research that keeps me focused and on
[131] the ball. For instance, in the
[132] past, if you thought, well, I'm not a
[133] maths person. my brain just doesn't work
[134] that way. Do yourself a favor and give
[135] Brilliant a go. The way you learn is so
[136] important. And with Brilliant, you don't
[137] just memorize mind-numbing formulas. You
[138] actually get hands-on with concepts
[139] until they make sense. It's
[140] personalized, researchedback learning
[141] that's making me a better thinker. And I
[142] genuinely can't recommend it highly
[143] enough. But before you go grabbing your
[144] free 30-day trial, I first need to tell
[145] you why the new Highark Stadium is such
[146] an outlier in the NFL. Don't worry, I'm
[147] going to be your accountability partner
[148] here, and I will remind you about
[149] Brilliance again once we're done.
[150] Now, everything we know from modern NFL
[151] facilities can be learned from the last
[152] four most recently opened stadiums. I
[153] mean, just look at them. They look like
[154] they could be the not so secret
[155] headquarters of the Avengers or
[156] something. From the outside, you'd
[157] barely know they were football stadiums.
[158] And in all honesty, they're not football
[159] stadiums. I mean, they are, but what I
[160] mean is they're about a lot more than
[161] just football. They're
[162] multi-purpose venues built to host
[163] concerts, festivals, gigs, Wrestlemania,
[164] whatever else might be going on.
[165] Basically, they're really big
[166] marketing and cash generating machines.
[167] [snorts]
[168] They're closed to the elements thanks to
[169] these spectacular looking roofs which
[170] enable year round usage. Remember, the
[171] football season only runs from September
[172] to February, depending on whether your
[173] team makes the playoffs. There's a whole
[174] 6 months of money to be made while
[175] football takes a break. They're clad in
[176] glass to create a premium aesthetic, and
[177] even the grass isn't really grass. Three
[178] of the four most recently opened
[179] stadiums feature an artificial playing
[180] surface because it's easier to maintain.
[181] And then we have New Highark Stadium,
[182] seemingly designed with one key
[183] priority.
[184] From day one, it was all about football
[185] first, Bill's Mafia, designing for the
[186] team, designing for the fans, and we
[187] never wavered off of that.
[188] >> Unlike its peers, you'll find no fancy
[189] roof, no artificial playing surface, and
[190] no crazy looking exterior facad. You
[191] see, punishing weather is all part of
[192] the game day experience here.
[193] >> By far the coldest game I've ever been
[194] to in my life. It's kind of the extra
[195] player on the build's roster, making
[196] life difficult for opposition players.
[197] Ownership was key to protect the open
[198] air exposure, but critically with some
[199] innovative engineering solutions to make
[200] sure that New Highark is in fact a
[201] stadium of the future. Although I'm
[202] pretty sure that saving millions on a
[203] fancy roof probably did play a part in
[204] the decision-making. While this stadium
[205] may not be following the modern trends
[206] set by other new arenas, its tech
[207] certainly is designed for the future.
[208] Just like you would when arriving for
[209] game day, let's start outside the
[210] stadium and work our way in. At the
[211] base, iron spot bricks form a solid band
[212] to give the building a modest grounding.
[213] Sprawling vertical elements then give a
[214] sense of power and strength.
[215] >> There's two primary materials that we
[216] see on the outside of the building.
[217] You know, the first is is the
[218] brick coursing at at the pedestrian
[219] level, and that ties to a lot of the
[220] usage of brick throughout Buffalo. In
[221] many ways, it was kind of a a brick town
[222] in some of the historic architecture.
[223] When you kind of zoom out and look at
[224] the overall design from further away,
[225] you'll notice these kind of depressions
[226] in the metal facade. Those depressions
[227] are essentially akin to the Odd and
[228] Kleinman's Music Hall and some of the
[229] historic 1939 buildings in Buffalo. Now,
[230] what we really want to show you on that
[231] exterior facade or the skin of the
[232] building is these. They're the first of
[233] a few unique weather deterrents in the
[234] armory. Thousands of perforations cover
[235] the 4,400 giant steel panels that span
[236] the external facade. Shaped like the
[237] Buffalo Bills charge logo, the gaps
[238] serve a very special purpose, wind
[239] manipulation. While the stadium
[240] is designed to embrace the elements, who
[241] wants to sit in a freezing bowl,
[242] constantly fending off the cold gusts of
[243] Buffalo air, as wind hits the
[244] perforations, it enters the gaps and
[245] slows, becoming kind of confused.
[246] This stops the air flowing over the top
[247] of the stadium and circling inside the
[248] bowl, making for a bitter and blustery
[249] game day experience. And by the way,
[250] that doesn't just protect fans from cold
[251] conditions. It also means Josh Allen can
[252] throw rockets down field with very
[253] little wind interference. But anyone
[254] who's been to Buffalo in the winter
[255] knows the wind is not the most dramatic
[256] weather obstacle.
[257] >> There's snow everywhere.
[258] >> The Buffalo Bills, they face the 49ers
[259] in a snowpacked stadium.
[260] >> Even in the Orchard uh Park area, we got
[261] just over 2 ft of snow.
[262] >> This stadium was never going to have a
[263] roof. this team, this ownership was all
[264] about football in December in Buffalo.
[265] And
[266] you know, snow is a friend, right, in
[267] terms of the of of the, you know, the
[268] home field advantage. Uh, that being
[269] said, we wanted to keep the fans dry.
[270] >> The city experiences about 95 in of
[271] snowfall each year, making it one of the
[272] snowiest areas in the whole of the US.
[273] And while it is a big part of the game
[274] day experience here, it's cold, pretty
[275] disruptive, and heavy, meaning it takes
[276] a toll on the structural elements.
[277] That's where the stadium comes into its
[278] own. Alongside heating in the pre-cast
[279] concrete stands to keep seating areas
[280] warm and further heating underneath the
[281] pitch, the canopy at the top of the
[282] stadium is a lot more than just a steel
[283] covering. As it stretches out over the
[284] stands from the structural frame, it
[285] tapers down and inwards to create a
[286] funnel, kind of like a wonky V. When
[287] snow falls, sensors detect the change in
[288] temperature, automatically activating
[289] what Mali describes as the largest snow
[290] melt system in the NFL. Hot water is
[291] sent through pipes that wrap around the
[292] canopy to melt the snow as it lands and
[293] in turn radiate heat down below. It's
[294] called a hydronic system. That canopy
[295] covers around 60% of all fans. But it
[296] has a secondary purpose, too. You see,
[297] completely open air stadiums, while
[298] still loud, tend to lose some of the
[299] game day experience. But this steel
[300] canopy has been specifically angled to
[301] trap noise inside the bowl, bouncing off
[302] the steel and reverberating it back
[303] through the stands. It's all part of
[304] this mission to create the most
[305] intimidating atmosphere anywhere in the
[306] NFL.
[307] Seating capacity has been stripped
[308] back to 60,000 from about 72,000
[309] at the old stadium with a further 5 to
[310] 10,000 people able to experience games
[311] from a standing only section. The idea
[312] is that standing fans create more noise
[313] leading to a more vibrant atmosphere.
[314] Football or soccer fans in the UK at top
[315] level fixtures are starting to
[316] experience a similar thing once again
[317] with the introduction of new safe
[318] standing areas. There are some stadiums
[319] in the NFL where you have like an entire
[320] open corner or you know there's
[321] different seating com sections that are
[322] not really connected. When you have
[323] continuity, you're creating continuity
[324] for the fan base and Bill's Mafia wants
[325] that. So creating that 360° environment
[326] creates, you know, this kind of energy
[327] amongst the fans which is really second
[328] to none. In the interest of
[329] making the experience more intimidating
[330] for visiting teams, the upper
[331] seating deck will be the closest to the
[332] pitch of any stadium in the league, and
[333] it'll feature the closest general
[334] admission tickets to the grass. Call me
[335] cliche, but years down the line, you
[336] might forget the score of a particular
[337] game, but you'll remember the way you
[338] felt when you were there. And that is
[339] what the Bills are trying to capture and
[340] create with the new Highark
[341] Stadium. This venue is going to be more
[342] intimate than any other in the NFL. It's
[343] going to enable fans to get closer to
[344] the players, to hear each play call, and
[345] really feel the energy of the action on
[346] the field. And at the end of the day,
[347] that is what being a spectator at a live
[348] sports event is all about. The Highark
[349] Stadium is impressive, but form follows
[350] function. And first and foremost, this
[351] is a football stadium. It's kitted out
[352] with groundbreaking engineering,
[353] innovative answers to Buffalo's climate,
[354] and it's been compared to one of these,
[355] but Mali isn't too concerned about that.
[356] It's funny, and I'm smiling because
[357] every great stadium, arena, project that
[358] I've personally worked on, there's
[359] always been commentary ahead of time
[360] before it's built, it looks like this,
[361] and you know, somebody says it looks
[362] like that. First of all, that's, you
[363] know, that's general public great
[364] commentary. It's being talked about.
[365] When it's filled and when it opens, all
[366] of that will be by the wayside. I'm
[367] fully confident in that.
[368] >> As innovative as all of these additions
[369] are, there's no getting around to one
[370] plain fact. There is no roof. As I
[371] mentioned earlier, a roof allows you to
[372] host a whole world of other events year
[373] round that snow and rain simply can't be
[374] a part of. And as amazing as the
[375] engineering behind New Hark is, it's a
[376] stadium that's built to embrace the
[377] elements rather than eradicate them. So,
[378] will this new stadium ever be able to
[379] host football's biggest events?
[380] >> I think Buffalo, you know, in that type
[381] of year might be a little bit tough. Uh,
[382] never never say never. Drawing people to
[383] non- major, you know, cities and
[384] locations for Super Bowl is a little bit
[385] of a challenge, but uh my fingers are
[386] crossed. So hosting the Super Bowl may
[387] be a no-go, but if truth be told, as
[388] we've already made clear, this is a
[389] venue built for Bill's fans. A topping
[390] out ceremony for the steel structure has
[391] come and gone with construction moving
[392] into the latter stages ahead of the
[393] opening in summer 2026.
[394] And without rubbishing some of the new
[395] facilities like SoFi and US Bank Stadium
[396] because let's be honest, they are epic,
[397] spectacular feats of architecture
[398] engineering, there's something quite
[399] satisfying about the Highark Stadium
[400] being built for football purists. This
[401] place looks like it's set to combine the
[402] best of the old stadium with new
[403] modern tech to very gently and
[404] delicately bring the Buffalo Bills and
[405] its history into the future. When you go
[406] to New High Mark, you should still get
[407] that unique Buffalo game day feeling,
[408] but with more than a touch of modern
[409] comfort. It'll offer a very different
[410] experience to any other new stadium in
[411] the NFL. And that in itself should be
[412] celebrated.
[413] This video was sponsored by Brilliant.
[414] Don't forget to go and check them out at
[415] the link below. And remember, it really
[416] helps the channel when you guys take the
[417] time to go and check out our video
[418] sponsors. And as always guys, if you
[419] enjoyed this video and you want to get
[420] more from the definitive video channel
[421] for construction, make sure you're
[422] subscribed to the B1M.