[47] right, and center. The league's newest
[48] stadium set to open in summer 2026 is
[49] New Highark, future home of the Buffalo
[50] Bills. The franchise currently plays at
[51] one of the oldest facilities in the NFL,
[52] the Highark Stadium. Renovating it to be

[66] cost around $1.9 billion. Mercedes-Benz,
[67] which opened in 2017, cost about $1.6
[68] billion. And the Sofi Stadium, home to
[69] both the Rams and the Chargers, cost
[70] around 5 billion. What's worth noting is

[97] supposedly greener pastures. But now
[98] with New Highark, the team will stay in
[99] Buffalo as they have since 1960. In a
[100] car park right across the road from the
[101] current stadium, the new Highark Stadium
[102] is now on the rise.

[111] Whether it's just to sound more
[112] interesting over dinner, or you want to
[113] finally get to grips with what AI really
[114] means for our planet, there's seriously
[115] no better teacher than today's video
[116] sponsor, Brilliant. With
[117] Brilliant, you don't just come away with
[118] the basics. You earn a deeper

[143] enough. But before you go grabbing your
[144] free 30-day trial, I first need to tell
[145] you why the new Highark Stadium is such
[146] an outlier in the NFL. Don't worry, I'm
[147] going to be your accountability partner
[148] here, and I will remind you about
[149] Brilliance again once we're done.

[158] And in all honesty, they're not football
[159] stadiums. I mean, they are, but what I
[160] mean is they're about a lot more than
[161] just football. They're
[162] multi-purpose venues built to host
[163] concerts, festivals, gigs, Wrestlemania,
[164] whatever else might be going on.
[165] Basically, they're really big
[166] marketing and cash generating machines.

[249] game day experience. And by the way,
[250] that doesn't just protect fans from cold
[251] conditions. It also means Josh Allen can
[252] throw rockets down field with very
[253] little wind interference. But anyone
[254] who's been to Buffalo in the winter
[255] knows the wind is not the most dramatic
[256] weather obstacle.

[277] That's where the stadium comes into its
[278] own. Alongside heating in the pre-cast
[279] concrete stands to keep seating areas
[280] warm and further heating underneath the
[281] pitch, the canopy at the top of the
[282] stadium is a lot more than just a steel
[283] covering. As it stretches out over the
[284] stands from the structural frame, it
[285] tapers down and inwards to create a
[286] funnel, kind of like a wonky V. When
[287] snow falls, sensors detect the change in
[288] temperature, automatically activating
[289] what Mali describes as the largest snow
[290] melt system in the NFL. Hot water is
[291] sent through pipes that wrap around the
[292] canopy to melt the snow as it lands and
[293] in turn radiate heat down below. It's
[294] called a hydronic system. That canopy
[295] covers around 60% of all fans. But it
[296] has a secondary purpose, too. You see,
[297] completely open air stadiums, while
[298] still loud, tend to lose some of the
[299] game day experience. But this steel
[300] canopy has been specifically angled to
[301] trap noise inside the bowl, bouncing off
[302] the steel and reverberating it back
[303] through the stands. It's all part of
[304] this mission to create the most
[305] intimidating atmosphere anywhere in the
[306] NFL.
[307] Seating capacity has been stripped
[308] back to 60,000 from about 72,000
[309] at the old stadium with a further 5 to
[310] 10,000 people able to experience games
[311] from a standing only section. The idea
