[3] Or if you're a resident of Buffalo, New York, you'll probably mention that you're helping to pay for it.
[4] But if you're a football fanatic, you'll instantly notice this looks nothing like any other new NFL stadium.
[6] And then there's New Hark, traditional, utilitarian, and seemingly not out of place in any major US city 50 years ago.
[8] With its old school brick detailing and open to the element style, New Hark Stadium is a facility that hearkens back to the venues of yester year.
[10] With its growing global appeal, you won't be surprised to hear the NFL is the most financially profitable sports league on the planet.
[12] According to Forbes, the Dallas Cowboys top the worldwide polls with a staggering value of $13 billion US.
[13] The nearest football or soccer team if you're across the pond is the mega giant Real Madrid, which ranks 20th at nearly 7 billion.
[19] But as the game continues its rapid ascension and the eyes of the world start paying more attention to America's game, no, not that one.
[22] The league's newest stadium set to open in summer 2026 is New Highark, future home of the Buffalo Bills. The franchise currently plays at one of the oldest facilities in the NFL, the Highark Stadium.
[25] You see, depending on the amount of work you're doing, you're basically merging modern amenities into an old structural skeleton.
[31] Mercedes-Benz, which opened in 2017, cost about $1.6 billion. And the Sofi Stadium, home to both the Rams and the Chargers, cost around 5 billion.
[32] What's worth noting is the massive public investment being put towards new Highark, a rather unpopular $850 million thanks to local and state taxpayers.
[35] >> It's one of the biggest investments ever made by the public into an NFL stadium, and it doesn't even have a roof.
[37] In the long run, it should deliver financial gains by attracting visitors to the area for football matches, gigs, or whatever else is happening at the stadium.
[38] But in reality, research suggests that these kind of investments almost never result in economic gains for a city's residents.
[42] After all, it wouldn't be the first team in recent memory to uproots and make for supposedly greener pastures.
[44] In a car park right across the road from the current stadium, the new Highark Stadium is now on the rise.
[45] Now, come the weekend, the NFL season will be over and we'll have a new Super Bowl champion.
[46] It's a serious accolade that takes years, if not decades, of hard work and forward planning.
[47] But for the majority of us who will never compete at professional sports, it's still really important to have goals.
[48] Whether it's just to sound more interesting over dinner, or you want to finally get to grips with what AI really means for our planet, there's seriously no better teacher than today's video sponsor, Brilliant.
[52] But let's be honest, we've all ended up reaching for our phone or looking out the window to see what the neighbors order for dinner when we're meant to be focusing on a task.
[54] The app's approach is backed by research that keeps me focused and on the ball.
[63] But before you go grabbing your free 30-day trial, I first need to tell you why the new Highark Stadium is such an outlier in the NFL.
[64] Don't worry, I'm going to be your accountability partner here, and I will remind you about Brilliance again once we're done.
[65] Now, everything we know from modern NFL facilities can be learned from the last four most recently opened stadiums.
[67] They look like they could be the not so secret headquarters of the Avengers or something.
[70] I mean, they are, but what I mean is they're about a lot more than just football.
[71] They're multi-purpose venues built to host concerts, festivals, gigs, Wrestlemania, whatever else might be going on.
[73] [snorts] They're closed to the elements thanks to these spectacular looking roofs which enable year round usage.
[74] Remember, the football season only runs from September to February, depending on whether your team makes the playoffs.
[76] They're clad in glass to create a premium aesthetic, and even the grass isn't really grass.
[77] Three of the four most recently opened stadiums feature an artificial playing surface because it's easier to maintain.