[3] but it's now 2026, which means we're
[4] already halfway towards the next games,
[5] and this one has set some pretty
[6] ambitious targets. There will be zero
[7] new venues, and it's being positioned as
[8] a nocar event. So, remind me where's
[9] this being held again?

[23] >> Moving the hashtag from 2024 to 2028,
[24] Los Angeles has decided it can wait it
[25] out an extra four years. When LA was
[26] awarded the 2028 Olympics back in 2017,
[27] the situation was far from normal. Paris
[28] was given the 2024 games at the very
[29] same event. Two host cities had never
[30] before been announced together. But
[31] there were good reasons for this.
[32] >> It became very clear that the IOC was
[33] having enormous difficulties finding
[34] cities that wanted to host the games.
[35] And indeed, the potential hosting for
[36] the 2024 games had four cities, four
[37] cities that had been bidding to host the
[38] games drop out. When they made their
[39] decision in 2017, there were only two
[40] biders left and one was Paris and one
[41] was Los Angeles. They were both good
[42] bets. Although Paris got 2024, LA was
[43] still a strong contender and agreed to
[44] wait another four years in return for
[45] extra funding, which was helpful because
[46] the next tournament is expected to cost
[47] around $7 billion.
[48] What made America's Second City a good
[49] bet for 2028 wasn't just that it would
[50] avoid another awkward round of bids from
[51] a dwindling number of candidates later
[52] on. No, it's the fact that it's already
[53] been there and done it twice. The first
[54] occasion was way back in 1932,
[55] taking place during the Great
[56] Depression. There were half as many
[57] athletes competing compared to Amsterdam
[58] 4 years earlier. But that didn't stop a
[59] then record-breaking 100,000 people
[60] turning up for the opening ceremony.
[61] Fast forward half a century, and LA 1984
[62] once again saw fewer countries
[63] competing, this time due to a boycott
[64] from the Soviet block. And yet you had
[65] Carl Lewis winning four gold medals,
[66] Michael Jordan top scoring in the
[67] basketball, and incredibly, the games
[68] finished with an actual profit of over
[69] $250 million.
[70] 2028 will see Los Angeles become the
[71] first city to hold the Olympics three
[72] times, and it'll continue a trend set by
[73] the two previous hosts. Both Paris and
[74] Tokyo focused on reusing venues rather
[75] than building lots of new ones. Not only
[76] did that reduce cost, it also avoided
[77] them spending huge amounts of money on
[78] giant arenas that could go on to become
[79] white elephants like we've seen in the
[80] past. Paris set the bar with 95% of its
[81] stadiums already existing. But LA plans
[82] to raise it even further, going ahead
[83] without any new construction whatsoever.

[89] Take the brand new into it dome now home
[90] to the Clippers of the NBA. No prizes
[91] for guessing. That's where you're going
[92] to find the basketball. Dodger Stadium
[93] is going to be for yeah baseball. And
[94] the wittier narrows Clay Shooting Center
[95] isn't going to be hosting the dress
[96] arch.
[97] While some of the venue choices are
[98] obvious, not all of them are being used
[99] in the way you might think, and others
[100] need a fair bit of upgrading before
[101] they're ready for the 2028 games. Take
[102] the new SoFi Stadium, primarily built
[103] for NFL and now set to host FIFA World
[104] Cup matches in 2026 along with the Super
[105] Bowl in 2027.
[106] But in 2028, SoFi won't be hosting the
[107] footy or American football, which isn't
[108] even in the Olympics. Instead, fans are
[109] going to come here to watch, wait for
[110] it, swimming. The most expensive stadium
[111] ever built is going to be converted into
[112] the largest dedicated aquatics venue in
[113] Olympics history with 40,000 seats. Now,
[114] the exact details of how they plan to do
[115] that aren't known yet, but obviously
[116] it's going to involve constructing a
[117] large pool in the middle of the stadium,
[118] one that will have to be removed again
[119] before the NFL season starts later that
[120] year. It'll be a massive undertaking,
[121] but Paris proved this sort of thing can
[122] be done. This temporary pool built for
[123] the 2024 games was constructed in just
[124] over a month. Doing something similar at
[125] Sofi is going to put swimming on a much
[126] bigger platform than when LA last hosted
[127] the Olympics. I like the the venue that
[128] they had at USC at University of
[129] Southern California, uh, which they used
[130] in 1984, but they felt like it it didn't
[131] provide the environment that was ideal.

[135] international television. The original
[136] idea was for SoFi to hold the closing
[137] ceremony as well with the LA Memorial
[138] Coliseum handling the opener, but plans
[139] have changed slightly. The opening
[140] ceremony is now going to be co-hosted by
[141] both stadiums. In fact, the Colosseum is
[142] another iconic venue that's set to
[143] undergo a bit of a transformation
[144] because like most Olympic stadiums, it's
[145] also going to be used for athletics.

[158] Overall, there'll be more than 40 venues
[159] spread across the city from Santa Monica
[160] to Anaheim and from Pasadena to Long
[161] Beach. As for getting to these sites,
[162] you might think that with this being LA,
[163] people are just going to pull up in
[164] their cars. But according to Mayor Karen
[165] Bass, the plan is actually for people to
[166] do the exact opposite.
[167] >> The main push will be no cars to the
[168] venues. Bass says the Olympics are a
[169] chance to make transformative change for
[170] the future. Okay, but because many
[171] people will still consider LA to be a
[172] very car- centric city, that idea sounds
[173] kind of crazy. Or maybe not, because
[174] since the last time LA hosted the
[175] Olympics, the cities introduced a
[176] completely new way of getting around the
[177] metro system. In 1990, just 6 years
[178] after the event, the city unveiled its
[179] first line, finally giving Angelinos the
[180] option to travel by rail instead of
[181] road.

[192] new form of mobility to the county. Was
[193] that promise kept? Well, fast forward a
[194] quarter of a century and the network
[195] looks like this, with well over a 100
[196] miles of routes now stretching across
[197] the city. While much of that work took
[198] place years ago, quite a lot's been done
[199] to this piece of infrastructure since
[200] the LA 2028 announcement. As of June
[201] 2025, the rail system has finally been
[202] linked up to the airport on the K and C
[203] lines. An automated people mover, also
[204] long awaited, is set to follow on in
[205] 2026. That'll provide a new direct rail
[206] link between the new Metro Transit
[207] Center and the LAX terminals.
[208] Another example of recent progress is
[209] the southern section of the Blue Line,
[210] now called the A- Line,
[211] heading straight out of Compton down to
[212] Long Beach, the route was given upgraded
[213] tracks, power lines, switching, and
[214] control systems back in 2019.
[215] Then there's the East Side Transit
[216] Corridor, which is going to link
[217] downtown to four of the so-called
[218] gateway cities in Southeast LA County.
[219] The first phase connecting Little Tokyo
[220] to the Atlantic Station in East Los
[221] Angeles as part of the Eline completed
[222] back in 2023.

[229] >> He's referring here to the Dline
[230] extension. It's going to run from Union
[231] Station through one of the city's
[232] biggest retail and commercial districts
[233] all the way out to Westside.
[234] >> That's a highcapacity system in a very
[235] dense corridor and it will move a ton of
[236] people much faster than buses can um and
[237] much obviously much more effectively
[238] than than cars.

[243] Two tunnel boring machines spent 5 years
[244] digging the 14 km new line, which is set
[245] to carry around 30,000 people a day. One
[246] LA Metro called it one of the most
[247] complex engineering feats the city's
[248] transit authority has ever undertaken.
[249] As workers excavated around 50 ft of
[250] tunnel each day, they discovered
[251] obstacles like gassy ground, tar sands,
[252] and abandoned oil wells. Thankfully,
[253] passengers are going to move through it
[254] a lot faster when it's in operation as
[255] they travel from downtown to West LA in
[256] less than 30 minutes.
[257] These works are all part of what's
[258] called the 28x 28 initiative announced
[259] by the city's former mayor in 2018.
[260] It's a list of, yep, 28 transport
[261] projects that the city of Los Angeles
[262] planned to complete in time for the
[263] games. All due to cost more than $26
[264] billion in total. So far, around a third
[265] of them are in operation.

[271] Those who still insist on driving are
[272] going to have to park away from the
[273] venues or travel by Uber, bike, or
[274] scooter via one of the planned mobility
[275] hubs. For an event not far from Silicon
[276] Valley, it's no surprise that digital
[277] tools are going to be part of the
[278] solution to LA's challenges. In fact,
[279] making the best use of data and
[280] technologies like AR, VR, and AI has
[281] become essential. They're quickly
[282] becoming the way to ensure that complex
[283] infrastructure and capital projects like
[284] this are delivered on time and on
[285] budget. After all, research shows that
[286] 92% of projects don't meet their
[287] commitments due to poor upfront
[288] planning, talent shortages, shifting
[289] regulations, and increasing stakeholder
[290] scrutiny. So, the organizations behind
[291] them are now finding they have to do
[292] things differently to avoid falling into
[293] familiar traps. think outdated
[294] processes, siloed operations, and enough
[295] red tape to, I don't know, wrap an
[296] entire Olympic stadium. Quite honestly,
[297] it can be difficult to know which way to
[298] turn, which is where Accenture comes in.
[299] By teaming up with Accenture, project
[300] teams are raising their game with
[301] delivery from initial concept all the
[302] way through to completion. Accenture
[303] brings together over 5,000 capital
[304] project experts worldwide with a unique
[305] blend of fieldproven execution
[306] leadership and deep expertise across
[307] strategy, construction tech, and project
[308] controls. And with a global leader
[309] behind you, your project strategy won't
[310] just challenge the norm, it'll
[311] outperform it. To see how Accenture can
[312] help you overcome your toughest project
[313] challenges from delivery performance to
[314] developing talent and scaling AI, visit
[315] accenture.com/ICP
[316] or click the link in the description.
[317] Now, let's get back to Los Angeles and
[318] see how the city has already been trying
[319] out some new tech ideas. The games are
[320] not the ideal place to test new
[321] technologies, but now is a good time to
[322] test new technologies for the games. And
[323] so we should be doing that. We have time
[324] to test some ideas that could be uh very
[325] useful. Now for example, I am a big
[326] believer in on demand uh transit. I I
[327] helped set up the metro micro system
[328] here in Los Angeles which is a
[329] microransit provider. I think
[330] microtransit has a role to play at least
[331] in first class mile services if not more
[332] for the Olympic games. And we've already
[333] been testing that service. But the main
[334] alternative to private vehicles will be
[335] energy efficient buses that officials
[336] hope to have running in time for the
[337] games. They plan to order more than
[338] 2,000 of them and to bring in dedicated
[339] freeway lanes so they're not held up in
[340] traffic.
[341] >> The bus is great. It's just great.
[342] Everything work great and it's cool.
[343] It's wonderful. No traffic. It's just
[344] wonderful. This would be a bit of a
[345] throwback to 1984 when buses were
[346] essential for transporting people and
[347] preventing gridlock. And yet, there's no
[348] guarantee at the moment that these buses
[349] are actually going to arrive because
[350] they're subject to federal funding,
[351] which has become a difficult issue.
[352] LA transit officials have requested more
[353] than $3 billion from the Trump
[354] administration. That money would also be
[355] used to pay for other transport projects
[356] like a new system of fast lanes on the
[357] freeways to get athletes and event
[358] workers around the city quicker.
[359] But while Congress did approve a large
[360] chunk of funding in early 2026, it falls
[361] quite a way short of the target figure,
[362] which raises questions about when or if
[363] the rest of the money is going to come
[364] in, especially when the US president's
[365] relationship with the mayor of LA and
[366] the governor of California has been a
[367] little bit frosty at times.
[368] And so if Donald Trump decides at a
[369] given moment that Los Angeles is
[370] misbehaving by his standards, um he
[371] could and he might well tell the
[372] Department of Transportation not 3.2
[373] billion, only 1.2 billion or whatever
[374] that number might be. Uh what is Los
[375] Angeles going to do in that
[376] circumstance? Well, they're going to
[377] have to go from the no car games to some
[378] car games.
[379] It could partly explain why organizers
[380] now describe the next Olympics as a
[381] transit first games instead of no cars.
[382] That's not to say they're making a
[383] complete U-turn. Far from it. Whatever
[384] happens, public transit is going to be
[385] the main way that people are expected to
[386] travel and it can be done. If you do the
