# Intro

[1] I don't know about you, but the Paris 2024 Olympics seems like only yesterday, but it's now 2026, which means we're already halfway towards the next games, and this one has set some pretty ambitious targets.
[2] There will be zero new venues, and it's being positioned as a nocar event.
[3] So, remind me where's this being held again?
[4] >> That's right, Los Angeles.
[5] Despite having a strong Olympic past, LA isn't exactly known for its public transit and has numerous other challenges to overcome before the summer of 2028.
[6] So, what are those challenges?
[7] And can this city be ready in time?
[8] It's becoming enormously burdensome financially, socially, environmentally to host the Olympic Games.
[9] If Los Angeles can't pull it off, then I think it's going to be even more discouraging to potential future cities.
# Securing the Olympics

[10] >> Moving the hashtag from 2024 to 2028, Los Angeles has decided it can wait it out an extra four years.
[11] When LA was awarded the 2028 Olympics back in 2017, the situation was far from normal.
[12] Paris was given the 2024 games at the very same event.
[13] Two host cities had never before been announced together.
[14] But there were good reasons for this.
[15] >> It became very clear that the IOC was having enormous difficulties finding cities that wanted to host the games.
[16] And indeed, the potential hosting for the 2024 games had four cities, four cities that had been bidding to host the games drop out.
[17] When they made their decision in 2017, there were only two biders left and one was Paris and one was Los Angeles.
[18] They were both good bets.
[19] Although Paris got 2024, LA was still a strong contender and agreed to wait another four years in return for extra funding, which was helpful because the next tournament is expected to cost around $7 billion.
# Previous occasions

[20] What made America's Second City a good bet for 2028 wasn't just that it would avoid another awkward round of bids from a dwindling number of candidates later on.
[21] No, it's the fact that it's already been there and done it twice.
[22] The first occasion was way back in 1932, taking place during the Great Depression.
[23] There were half as many athletes competing compared to Amsterdam 4 years earlier.
[24] But that didn't stop a then record-breaking 100,000 people turning up for the opening ceremony.
[25] Fast forward half a century, and LA 1984 once again saw fewer countries competing, this time due to a boycott from the Soviet block.
[26] And yet you had Carl Lewis winning four gold medals, Michael Jordan top scoring in the basketball, and incredibly, the games finished with an actual profit of over $250 million.
[27] 2028 will see Los Angeles become the first city to hold the Olympics three times, and it'll continue a trend set by the two previous hosts.
# No-Build Games

[28] Both Paris and Tokyo focused on reusing venues rather than building lots of new ones.
[29] Not only did that reduce cost, it also avoided them spending huge amounts of money on giant arenas that could go on to become white elephants like we've seen in the past.
[30] Paris set the bar with 95% of its stadiums already existing.
[31] But LA plans to raise it even further, going ahead without any new construction whatsoever.
[32] And you can kind of understand why.
[33] Most of his stadiums are in very good shape and hardly need anything doing to them or have been recently constructed anyway.
[34] Take the brand new into it dome now home to the Clippers of the NBA.
[35] No prizes for guessing.
[36] That's where you're going to find the basketball.
[37] Dodger Stadium is going to be for yeah baseball.
[38] And the wittier narrows Clay Shooting Center isn't going to be hosting the dress arch.
[39] While some of the venue choices are obvious, not all of them are being used in the way you might think, and others need a fair bit of upgrading before they're ready for the 2028 games.
# Adapting venues

[40] Take the new SoFi Stadium, primarily built for NFL and now set to host FIFA World Cup matches in 2026 along with the Super Bowl in 2027.
[41] But in 2028, SoFi won't be hosting the footy or American football, which isn't even in the Olympics.
[42] Instead, fans are going to come here to watch, wait for it, swimming.
[43] The most expensive stadium ever built is going to be converted into the largest dedicated aquatics venue in Olympics history with 40,000 seats.
[44] Now, the exact details of how they plan to do that aren't known yet,
[45] but obviously it's going to involve constructing a large pool in the middle of the stadium, one that will have to be removed again before the NFL season starts later that year.
[46] It'll be a massive undertaking, but Paris proved this sort of thing can be done.
[47] This temporary pool built for the 2024 games was constructed in just over a month.
[48] Doing something similar at Sofi is going to put swimming on a much bigger platform than when LA last hosted the Olympics.
[49] I like the the venue that they had at USC at University of Southern California, uh, which they used in 1984, but they felt like it it didn't provide the environment that was ideal.
[50] It probably makes some sense from the standpoint of showing the Olympics and showing Los Angeles in its best light on international television.
[51] The original idea was for SoFi to hold the closing ceremony as well with the LA Memorial Coliseum handling the opener, but plans have changed slightly.
[52] The opening ceremony is now going to be co-hosted by both stadiums.
[53] In fact, the Colosseum is another iconic venue that's set to undergo a bit of a transformation because like most Olympic stadiums, it's also going to be used for athletics.
[54] Except there's a problem.
[55] When it was upgraded in 1990, a lot of extra seating was added in around the lower tiers, which meant more capacity, but little room for something that every track and field venue needs, a track.
[56] What they intend to do is build a temporary deck on the floor of the bowl, propped up on supports.
[57] This will create the track and field as well as space underneath for athletes to complete their warm-ups.
[58] Overall, there'll be more than 40 venues spread across the city from Santa Monica to Anaheim and from Pasadena to Long Beach.
# No-Car Games?

[59] As for getting to these sites, you might think that with this being LA, people are just going to pull up in their cars.
[60] But according to Mayor Karen Bass, the plan is actually for people to do the exact opposite.
[61] >> The main push will be no cars to the venues.
[62] Bass says the Olympics are a chance to make transformative change for the future.
[63] Okay, but because many people will still consider LA to be a very car- centric city, that idea sounds kind of crazy.
[64] Or maybe not, because since the last time LA hosted the Olympics, the cities introduced a completely new way of getting around the metro system.
[65] In 1990, just 6 years after the event, the city unveiled its first line, finally giving Angelinos the option to travel by rail instead of road.
[66] >> Something that's really needed.
[67] Well, probably I can't drive my car for three more months, so maybe I'll just ride this fast.
[68] >> We've been looking forward to this a long time.
[69] >> Opening day of the Metro Blue Line was the delivery of a promise that over the next two decades, rail lines would emerge to link communities and bring a new form of mobility to the county.
[70] Was that promise kept?
# Metro upgrades

[71] Well, fast forward a quarter of a century and the network looks like this, with well over a 100 miles of routes now stretching across the city.
[72] While much of that work took place years ago, quite a lot's been done to this piece of infrastructure since the LA 2028 announcement.
[73] As of June 2025, the rail system has finally been linked up to the airport on the K and C lines.
[74] An automated people mover, also long awaited, is set to follow on in 2026.
[75] That'll provide a new direct rail link between the new Metro Transit Center and the LAX terminals.
[76] Another example of recent progress is the southern section of the Blue Line, now called the A- Line, heading straight out of Compton down to Long Beach,
[77] the route was given upgraded tracks, power lines, switching, and control systems back in 2019.
[78] Then there's the East Side Transit Corridor, which is going to link downtown to four of the so-called gateway cities in Southeast LA County.
[79] The first phase connecting Little Tokyo to the Atlantic Station in East Los Angeles as part of the Eline completed back in 2023.
[80] But arguably the most important upgrade of all is still under construction.
[81] The project that is most critical not only for the games but for the future of Los Angeles is the subway that's being built under Wilshire Boulevard.
[82] >> He's referring here to the Dline extension.
[83] It's going to run from Union Station through one of the city's biggest retail and commercial districts all the way out to Westside.
[84] >> That's a highcapacity system in a very dense corridor and it will move a ton of people much faster than buses can um and much obviously much more effectively than than cars.
[85] >> While the full routes with its seven stations isn't due to finish until 2027, the tunneling for it concluded back in 2024.
[86] Two tunnel boring machines spent 5 years digging the 14 km new line, which is set to carry around 30,000 people a day.
[87] One LA Metro called it one of the most complex engineering feats the city's transit authority has ever undertaken.
[88] As workers excavated around 50 ft of tunnel each day, they discovered obstacles like gassy ground, tar sands, and abandoned oil wells.
[89] Thankfully, passengers are going to move through it a lot faster when it's in operation as they travel from downtown to West LA in less than 30 minutes.
# Twenty-eight by 28

[90] These works are all part of what's called the 28x 28 initiative announced by the city's former mayor in 2018.
[91] It's a list of, yep, 28 transport projects that the city of Los Angeles planned to complete in time for the games.
[92] All due to cost more than $26 billion in total.
[93] So far, around a third of them are in operation.
[94] Now, getting people to travel by rail isn't the only objective.
[95] A no car strategy doesn't mean no roads at all.
[96] That would be impossible in a place like LA.
[97] Those who still insist on driving are going to have to park away from the venues or travel by Uber, bike, or scooter via one of the planned mobility hubs.
[98] For an event not far from Silicon Valley, it's no surprise that digital tools are going to be part of the solution to LA's challenges.
[99] In fact, making the best use of data and technologies like AR, VR, and AI has become essential.
[100] They're quickly becoming the way to ensure that complex infrastructure and capital projects like this are delivered on time and on budget.
[101] After all, research shows that 92% of projects don't meet their commitments due to poor upfront planning, talent shortages, shifting regulations, and increasing stakeholder scrutiny.
[102] So, the organizations behind them are now finding they have to do things differently to avoid falling into familiar traps.
[103] think outdated processes, siloed operations, and enough red tape to, I don't know, wrap an entire Olympic stadium.
[104] Quite honestly, it can be difficult to know which way to turn, which is where Accenture comes in.
[105] By teaming up with Accenture, project teams are raising their game with delivery from initial concept all the way through to completion.
[106] Accenture brings together over 5,000 capital project experts worldwide with a unique blend of fieldproven execution leadership and deep expertise across strategy, construction tech, and project controls.
[107] And with a global leader behind you, your project strategy won't just challenge the norm, it'll outperform it.
[108] To see how Accenture can help you overcome your toughest project challenges from delivery performance to developing talent and scaling AI, visit accenture.com/ICP or click the link in the description.
[109] Now, let's get back to Los Angeles and see how the city has already been trying out some new tech ideas.
# Transport alternatives

[110] The games are not the ideal place to test new technologies, but now is a good time to test new technologies for the games.
[111] And so we should be doing that.
[112] We have time to test some ideas that could be uh very useful.
[113] Now for example, I am a big believer in on demand uh transit.
[114] I I helped set up the metro micro system here in Los Angeles which is a microransit provider.
[115] I think microtransit has a role to play at least in first class mile services if not more for the Olympic games.
[116] And we've already been testing that service.
[117] But the main alternative to private vehicles will be energy efficient buses that officials hope to have running in time for the games.
[118] They plan to order more than 2,000 of them and to bring in dedicated freeway lanes so they're not held up in traffic.
[119] >> The bus is great. It's just great.
[120] Everything work great and it's cool.
[121] It's wonderful. No traffic.
[122] It's just wonderful.
[123] This would be a bit of a throwback to 1984 when buses were essential for transporting people and preventing gridlock.
# Funding issues

[124] And yet, there's no guarantee at the moment that these buses are actually going to arrive because they're subject to federal funding, which has become a difficult issue.
[125] LA transit officials have requested more than $3 billion from the Trump administration.
[126] That money would also be used to pay for other transport projects like a new system of fast lanes on the freeways to get athletes and event workers around the city quicker.
[127] But while Congress did approve a large chunk of funding in early 2026, it falls quite a way short of the target figure,
[128] which raises questions about when or if the rest of the money is going to come in,
[129] especially when the US president's relationship with the mayor of LA and the governor of California has been a little bit frosty at times.
[130] And so if Donald Trump decides at a given moment that Los Angeles is misbehaving by his standards,
[131] um he could and he might well tell the Department of Transportation not 3.2 billion, only 1.2 billion or whatever that number might be.
[132] Uh what is Los Angeles going to do in that circumstance?
[133] Well, they're going to have to go from the no car games to some car games.
# Going ‘Transit-First’

[134] It could partly explain why organizers now describe the next Olympics as a transit first games instead of no cars.
[135] That's not to say they're making a complete U-turn.
[136] Far from it.
[137] Whatever happens, public transit is going to be the main way that people are expected to travel and it can be done.
[138] If you do the right kind of communication and discussion and planning uh and you put those alternatives out there, I think it is very possible.
[139] Just to give a quick example, I mean, I did some work recently for the Hollywood Bowl, uh, which is a very famous and pretty autocentric, uh, venue here in Los Angeles.
[140] We've got over 50% of people now going to the Hollywood Bowl by bus.
[141] It wasn't a miracle.
[142] It was that it was effective planning and making those buses work really well and making parking cost what it should cost, which is a lot.
[143] Uh, and if you if you price the parking and the roads effectively and you put the transit service out there, it will be the most convenient option and people will use it.
# Moving the goalposts

[144] >> However, several infrastructure schemes have had their completion dates pushed back to after the games.
[145] Phase 2 of the East Side Corridor isn't due to complete until at least 2035, and that won't even be the full line.
[146] It's one of 11 projects originally in the 28 by 2028 that have had to be removed.
[147] They've been substituted for other schemes that are either in progress or operational and are more likely to hit the deadline.
[148] Although it might not be as bad as it sounds because many of the names in that list were seen as too ambitious from the start.
[149] A lot of the projects in 28 by 28 I think were much more aspirational of like wouldn't it be great if we got this done
[150] but not all of them were realistic and I think I think the folks who were there at the time knew that.
[151] So can we be confident that the LA Olympics the venues the supporting infrastructure and the event itself is going to be done on time creating a successful games?
[152] Will it come in under budget again or at least not way over?
[153] Andrew thinks the signs look promising despite the political awkwardness due to its ticket sales program, TV contracts, and sponsorships.
[154] But it still won't be easy.
# Will the gamble pay off?

[155] >> I'm hopeful that they'll be able to come in on balance.
[156] But all I would say with regard to the no plan, the no no cars plan is that it does create some vulnerability both in terms of the goals of the Olympics
[157] and some vulnerability in terms of of the financing.
[158] Despite this, there's still time for LA to finish those last few projects that are essential and overcome any other hurdles it finds in its way.
[159] After all, it's a chance for America and its second city to prove once again that it can put on the biggest of shows.
[160] >> I would love for the rest of the world to see how fantastic Los Angeles is.
[161] You know, people like to make fun of Los Angeles uh for being a place that is car dependent and often vapid.
[162] And I think that those things have a grain of truth to them, but there's so much more to it that I'd love for the world to see.
[163] And this is our opportunity to show that.
[164] This video was sponsored by Accenture.
[165] You can learn more about Accenture at the link below.
[166] Don't forget that when you guys take the time to go and check out our video sponsors, it massively helps the channel.
[167] And as always guys, if you enjoyed this video and you want to get more from the definitive video channel for construction, make sure you subscribe to the B1M.