[52] >> We had a big push in infrastructure with
[53] uh the unification of Germany in the
[54] '90s. I think the infrastructure was
[55] quite good in the west of Germany at
[56] least. A lot of money was provided for

[62] Still, it could be worse. Yes, there are
[63] defects, but they're usually spotted and
[64] fixed before things then carry on as
[65] usual. But recently, there have been
[66] some pretty big exceptions to that,
[67] including one failure that made news
[68] around the world.

[78] >> Just before 3:00 a.m. on September 11th,
[79] 2024, the Corolla Bridge in Dresden fell
[80] suddenly into the River Ela. Built in
[81] 1971 before reunification, the concrete
[82] structure was used by pedestrians,
[83] cyclists, and trams, including one that
[84] had just passed over it mere minutes
[85] beforehand.

[126] and so if you have this acid fog in the
[127] air it was coming down to the
[128] pre-stressing steel this damage process
[129] was in induced so the bridge had already
[130] from the beginning of its lifetime a
[131] very much reduced safety factor which
[132] nobody really knew.

[161] They've also given our viewers 20% off
[162] an annual premium subscription,
[163] which gives you unlimited daily access
[164] to everything on Brilliant. But until
[165] then, let's get back to Germany's not so
[166] brilliant infrastructure.

[190] However, there is at last some good news
[191] to report. In March 2025, German
[192] Chancellor Friedri Mertz announced a
[193] massive spending push. A staggering €500
[194] billion, that's around €550 billion US,
[195] has now been earmarked for upgrades
[196] right across the country.

[205] This spending is going to be spread out
[206] over a 12-ear period. It makes no sense
[207] to spend one year 500 billion extra euro
[208] and then next year is is empty again. We
[209] need a long-term perspective. So this is
[210] good. But same time of course
[211] it's only 40 billion euro per year. And

[223] transport infrastructure. Now,
[224] obviously, that's a pretty broad
[225] category, and it's not yet clear exactly
[226] how that pot of money is going to be
[227] divided up, but it appears likely that
[228] Deutschean, Germany's national railway
[229] company, will get the lion share. One
[230] economic research institute claims that
[231] almost €19 billion has been set aside to
[232] support DB in just the first full year
[233] of the new fund, which is 2026.

[242] But now it's got to the stage where big
[243] projects, important international
[244] projects, are being put on hold. The
[245] northern access route of the Brena Base
[246] tunnel, which will be the world's
[247] longest underground rail connection when
[248] it completes, is in limbo over financial
[249] constraints. While the line itself
[250] connects Austria and Italy, one of the
[251] lines that's going to feed into it from
[252] Munich has been temporarily paused.

[283] At more than 500 km long, it'll
[284] transport electricity generated by wind
[285] farms in the north of Germany to the
[286] southern end of the country,
[287] which requires finding a way around some
[288] difficult obstacles. A 5 km tunnel is
[289] being excavated so the cable can pass 20
[290] m under the Ela River and
[291] through areas with high levels of
[292] groundwater. Yes, that's the same river
[293] where the Dresden Bridge
[294] collapsed.
[295] Okay, but how is it that Germany is able
[296] to spend all this money now? And why
[297] couldn't it have just spent it all
[298] before? Well, it's all to do with
[299] something called the debt break. It's a
[300] constitutional rule in Germany that caps
[301] new borrowing from the federal
[302] government at 0.35%

[325] it first appears. And it's a similar
[326] case with road bridges and digital
[327] upgrades. What you can see for rail for
[328] example is that they employed another
[329] trick in the budget that actually
[330] whatever money they had so far for
[331] railways and for infrastructure was
[332] taken out of the core budget and now to
[333] be financed from this new fund. So not
[334] additional but just shifting money and
[335] that gives you more room in the core
[336] budget for all kind of wonderful things
[337] uh that politicians want to give to
[338] their voters. There's also the fact that
[339] money isn't the only problem. As we
[340] mentioned earlier, projects here often
[341] get bogged down in bureaucracy and
[342] there's a shortage of skilled workers.

[356] Now, despite everything we've just said,
[357] before the 500 billion euro package was
[358] announced, things weren't always that
[359] bad. When big highway infrastructure
[360] upgrades are properly planned here, they
[361] can be very impressive. After all,
[362] Germany does still have some of the
[363] world's best engineers that can pull off
[364] a big job as well as anyone. Like with
[365] the A45 Rinsdor fire duct near Dortmund,
[366] which was originally built in the 1960s.

[375] slide. The new structure was built away
[376] from the live road and joined onto it
[377] through what's called a transverse
[378] shift. Teflon plates acting as sliding
[379] pads were installed between the
[380] specially prepared tracks and the base
[381] of the foundation. Then with the help of
[382] 24 hydraulic jacks, engineers were able
[383] to move the bridge at a speed of 1 mph
[384] until it covered a distance of 20 m and
[385] slotted in next to its neighbor.
