[37] repair or due to be replaced. Tens of
[38] thousands of bridges have been
[39] identified as needing upgrades with the
[40] worst cases facing demolition over the
[41] next 10 years. But it's not always been
[42] this way. We had the situation that a
[43] lot of the infrastructure was destroyed
[44] after World War II and it gave us the
[45] chance to start a new in many cases. And

[54] '90s. I think the infrastructure was
[55] quite good in the west of Germany at
[56] least. A lot of money was provided for

[126] and so if you have this acid fog in the
[127] air it was coming down to the
[128] pre-stressing steel this damage process
[129] was in induced so the bridge had already
[130] from the beginning of its lifetime a
[131] very much reduced safety factor which
[132] nobody really knew.

[244] projects, are being put on hold. The
[245] northern access route of the Brena Base
[246] tunnel, which will be the world's
[247] longest underground rail connection when
[248] it completes, is in limbo over financial
[249] constraints. While the line itself
[250] connects Austria and Italy, one of the
[251] lines that's going to feed into it from
[252] Munich has been temporarily paused.

[283] At more than 500 km long, it'll
[284] transport electricity generated by wind
[285] farms in the north of Germany to the
[286] southern end of the country,
[287] which requires finding a way around some
[288] difficult obstacles. A 5 km tunnel is
[289] being excavated so the cable can pass 20
[290] m under the Ela River and
[291] through areas with high levels of
[292] groundwater. Yes, that's the same river
[293] where the Dresden Bridge
[294] collapsed.

[325] it first appears. And it's a similar
[326] case with road bridges and digital
[327] upgrades. What you can see for rail for
[328] example is that they employed another
[329] trick in the budget that actually
[330] whatever money they had so far for
[331] railways and for infrastructure was
[332] taken out of the core budget and now to
[333] be financed from this new fund. So not
[334] additional but just shifting money and
[335] that gives you more room in the core
[336] budget for all kind of wonderful things
[337] uh that politicians want to give to
[338] their voters. There's also the fact that
[339] money isn't the only problem. As we

[378] shift. Teflon plates acting as sliding
[379] pads were installed between the
[380] specially prepared tracks and the base
[381] of the foundation. Then with the help of
[382] 24 hydraulic jacks, engineers were able
[383] to move the bridge at a speed of 1 mph
[384] until it covered a distance of 20 m and
[385] slotted in next to its neighbor.
