# Intro

[1] In September 2024, a bridge in Dresden, Germany, collapsed without warning.
[2] 6 months later, a ring road in Berlin had to be closed after inspectors found a crack that had grown unexpectedly.
[3] The section was immediately demolished, causing traffic chaos.
[4] We could go on because these are just two examples of how far the backbone of Germany's transport network has declined due to neglect and poor maintenance.
[5] But help has arrived in the form of a€ 500 billion euro fund aimed at revitalizing the country's infrastructure with more than just bridges and railways set to benefits.
[6] It's an enormous sum of money, one that you'd think should be able to solve these problems once and for all.
[7] And yet, incredibly, people are asking, will it be enough?
# Scale of the Challenge

[8] Germany is the world's third largest economy, but you wouldn't know it from the state of some of its infrastructure.
[9] Yes, it has one of the largest highspeed rail systems on the planet.
[10] When it actually runs on time, that is.
[11] There's the autoban, too, which is great when you're not being diverted suddenly or made to slow right down due to the constant road works.
[12] One reason there's so much of that is because many of the structures that support those roads are in dire need of repair or due to be replaced.
[13] Tens of thousands of bridges have been identified as needing upgrades with the worst cases facing demolition over the next 10 years.
[14] But it's not always been this way.
[15] We had the situation that a lot of the infrastructure was destroyed after World War II and it gave us the chance to start a new in many cases.
[16] And so we had quite a modern and advanced infrastructure if you look back to the 70s and 80s.
[17] >> Dr. Christian Bertgur is a professor at HTW Berlin, a university of applied sciences based in the German capital.
[18] >> We had a big push in infrastructure with uh the unification of Germany in the '90s.
[19] I think the infrastructure was quite good in the west of Germany at least. A lot of money was provided for
[20] upgrading the infrastructure in the east that had not been upgraded in the same way after the war as in the west.
[21] But since that time, it has been deteriorating actually.
[22] Still, it could be worse.
[23] Yes, there are defects, but they're usually spotted and fixed before things then carry on as usual. But recently, there have been some pretty big exceptions to that, including one failure that made news around the world.
[24] Here in Germany, officials are investigating the partial collapse of a bridge in the eastern city of Dresden.
# Dresden Bridge Collapse

[25] >> You can see there had been traffic on the bridge throughout the night, but thankfully the Dresden Bridge was empty at the time.
[26] We're told other parts of the concrete bridge are also at risk of a collapse at this point.
[27] >> Just before 3:00 a.m. on September 11th, 2024, the Corolla Bridge in Dresden fell suddenly into the River Ela.
[28] Built in 1971 before reunification, the concrete structure was used by pedestrians, cyclists, and trams, including one that had just passed over it mere minutes beforehand.
[29] While no one was hurt, the resulting debris blocked ships from accessing this section of the river for months.
[30] Having two other bridges on the river meant detours were quickly found.
[31] But still, the loss of this one has made traveling around the city much more difficult than it should be.
[32] After the collapse, it was of course shocking and also influencing the traffic much, but the traffic found other ways.
[33] Stefan Marx is a professor at Dresdon's Technical University. He was commissioned by city officials to write a report on the reasons for the Corolla Bridge collapse.
[34] In average, we have four to 5 minutes um uh higher traffic time if you need to cross the city uh and if you need to cross the river.
[35] Of course, in rush hours, the time effort is much higher.
[36] Yeah. So then you can even spend half an hour longer in some days.
[37] >> Not only did the incident sever a major transport connection, the bridge also carried utility pipes, leaving many people without heating or hot water.
[38] Stefan discovered that material fatigue over time and cracking caused by hydrogen-induced stress corrosion are what led to the bridgeg's failure. But we'll let him explain in a little more detail.
[39] It was activated already during the construction time due to a moisture which was in the air containing acid and the acid was from the heating of the coal heaters in all the flats in in Germany
[40] and so if you have this acid fog in the air it was coming down to the pre-stressing steel
[41] this damage process was in induced so the bridge had already from the beginning of its lifetime a very much reduced safety factor which nobody really knew.
[42] So now that you're an expert in hydrogen induced stress corrosion, you might be wondering what's next?
[43] How can I learn more about these sciency subjects?
[44] And if that's you, then I get it because I too love mastering how things work and learning how they can go very, very wrong like in the example we just heard.
[45] But to ensure my brain cells don't crumble like that bridge, I have Brilliant on hand to help keep my knowledge intact.
[46] Through their scientific thinking course, you can discover how structures are built to last step by step.
[47] By experimenting with weights, beams, and gears, you learn by doing and problem solving, which is the best way to strengthen your science skills.
[48] I found their courses a lot of fun,
[49] too. But if science isn't up your straza, then don't worry because they've got thousands of lessons in maths, programming, data analysis, and AI as well. To learn for free on Brilliant for a full 30 days, go to brilliant.org/theb1m.
[50] Scan the QR code on screen or click the link down in the video description.
[51] They've also given our viewers 20% off an annual premium subscription, which gives you unlimited daily access to everything on Brilliant.
[52] But until then, let's get back to Germany's not so brilliant infrastructure.
# More Problems

[53] You can see why this incident sparked a lot of concern about the condition of other bridges across the country.
[54] And Germans didn't have long to wait for the next problem. March 2025 saw a highway bridge in Berlin quickly demolished after a crack had widened faster than predicted.
[55] Although this ultimately prevented disaster, many Berliners felt it shouldn't have been allowed to get to this stage.
[56] On entirely new projects, Germany's reputation has taken a bit of a hit as well. Brandenburgg Airport, also in the capital, famously took decades to open because it was marred by a bureaucracy and poor management.
[57] The same goes for other mega projects that remain ongoing like Stutgart 21 and Munich's new Esban line, both of which are hugely expensive and heavily delayed.
# 500BN Rescue Plan

[58] However, there is at last some good news to report.
[59] In March 2025, German Chancellor Friedri Mertz announced a massive spending push. A staggering €500 billion, that's around €550 billion US, has now been earmarked for upgrades right across the country.
[60] 300 billion of that will be given to the federal government for infrastructure projects. A h 100red billion has been set aside for individual states and the remaining 100 billion is for climate related investments.
[61] But it's not all being splurged in one go if that's what you're thinking.
[62] This spending is going to be spread out over a 12-ear period.
[63] It makes no sense to spend one year 500 billion extra euro and then next year is is empty again.
[64] We need a long-term perspective.
[65] So this is good.
[66] But same time of course it's only 40 billion euro per year.
[67] And this means it's also spent not only in bridges, it is energy infrastructure, water infrastructure, schools and street traffic as well as railway traffic.
[68] In fact, let's bring up some actual data on that. According to a summary from Germany's stateowned development bank, KFW, this is where the funds will be going in the first few years.
[69] And it's no surprise to see that more than half the money is being invested into transport infrastructure.
[70] Now, obviously, that's a pretty broad category, and it's not yet clear exactly how that pot of money is going to be divided up, but it appears likely that Deutschean, Germany's national railway company, will get the lion share.
[71] One economic research institute claims that almost €19 billion has been set aside to support DB in just the first full year of the new fund, which is 2026.
[72] That surely will be appreciated as the operator has stated it needs as much as 150 billion euros to repair and modernize the network up to 2034.
[73] Financial issues with German railways are nothing new. The system has been underfunded for decades and has become increasingly unreliable.
# Frustrating the Neighbours

[74] But now it's got to the stage where big projects, important international projects, are being put on hold.
[75] The northern access route of the Brena Base tunnel, which will be the world's longest underground rail connection when it completes, is in limbo over financial constraints.
[76] While the line itself connects Austria and Italy, one of the lines that's going to feed into it from Munich has been temporarily paused.
[77] >> We promised them to have a line ready by then uh which will not be ready when when Austria is ready. We promise the same thing to the Swiss um when they open the Gotard Basel.
[78] Uh right now we talk about completion somewhere 2045 or so.
[79] The Danish are building a new tunnel connecting the islands of Fa and Feiman and there won't be a connection available on the German side when they are ready.
[80] So if if you really look around, we are really frustrating our neighbors and uh so it's really a very disappointing situation.
# Energy Infrastructure

[81] >> Perhaps things are a bit less bleak outside the transport sector.
[82] Well, potentially yes. Several energy projects can expect to be handed a portion of that 100 billion euro chunk which will help Germany transition to a more climatefriendly power supply.
[83] Investing more in hydrogen infrastructure and renewables is how it plans to do this. And it's already made a head start on that with some truly amazing feats of engineering.
[84] Take the Sud link for example, a massive underground high voltage power link that will become the longest of its kind in the world when it completes.
[85] At more than 500 km long, it'll transport electricity generated by wind farms in the north of Germany to the southern end of the country, which requires finding a way around some difficult obstacles. A 5 km tunnel is being excavated so the cable can pass 20 m under the Ela River and through areas with high levels of groundwater.
[86] Yes, that's the same river where the Dresden Bridge collapsed.
# Finding the Funds

[87] Okay, but how is it that Germany is able to spend all this money now? And why couldn't it have just spent it all before? Well, it's all to do with something called the debt break.
[88] It's a constitutional rule in Germany that caps new borrowing from the federal government at 0.35%
[89] of GDP. Over the years, that's prevented Germany from loaning large sums of money to invest in new infrastructure.
[90] But this new fund is an exception to the rule. It's been organized outside of the debt break, meaning they can splash out in a big way.
[91] And the reason it can be done now is that Germany's debt to GDP ratio is a lot better than countries like France, Italy, the UK, and the US.
[92] However, some have raised concerns about how the new money will complement the usual funding. In other words, what would have been supplied by the local and national governments in a normal year.
[93] The German Economic Institute found that Deutsche Barn's 19 billion euro injection comes at the same time that almost 14 billion of rail investments have been cut from the federal budget.
[94] So it's less of an increase overall than it first appears.
[95] And it's a similar case with road bridges and digital upgrades. What you can see for rail for example is that they employed another trick in the budget that actually whatever money they had so far for railways and for infrastructure was taken out of the core budget and now to be financed from this new fund.
[96] So not additional but just shifting money and that gives you more room in the core budget for all kind of wonderful things uh that politicians want to give to their voters.
[97] There's also the fact that money isn't the only problem.
[98] As we mentioned earlier, projects here often get bogged down in bureaucracy and there's a shortage of skilled workers.
[99] If these issues aren't sorted, then Germany's ability to build the infrastructure and repair what it's already got, it's going to get even harder.
[100] Maintenance is completely boring for politics, but it's essential.
[101] If we don't maintain our infrastructure, we will end in a mess for sure.
[102] And if we allow a degradation of our existing infrastructure, we will really lose our basis for everything in in the society, for the business, but also for everything else.
# Rinsdorf Viaduct

[103] Now, despite everything we've just said, before the 500 billion euro package was announced, things weren't always that bad. When big highway infrastructure upgrades are properly planned here, they can be very impressive.
[104] After all, Germany does still have some of the world's best engineers that can pull off a big job as well as anyone.
[105] Like with the A45 Rinsdor fire duct near Dortmund, which was originally built in the 1960s.
[106] By the 2020s, it developed structural issues that couldn't be simply repaired, which led to one of the most satisfying demolitions you're ever likely to see.
[107] Wonderbar.
[108] >> 3 years after the eastern section came down in 2022, it was time to slide its replacement into position.
[109] Yes, we said slide.
[110] The new structure was built away from the live road and joined onto it through what's called a transverse shift.
[111] Teflon plates acting as sliding pads were installed between the specially prepared tracks and the base of the foundation.
[112] Then with the help of 24 hydraulic jacks, engineers were able to move the bridge at a speed of 1 mph until it covered a distance of 20 m and slotted in next to its neighbor.
[113] It was an astonishing achievement and showed that if the money is there, Germany can build big infrastructure as well as anyone.
# The New Carolabrücke

[114] But let's go back to that bridge in Dresden for a moment.
[115] Because ever since that incident happened, the question on many people's lips has been what happens next.
[116] You'll be pleased to know that the bridge is going to be replaced.
[117] And while initially they thought that process could take 10 years to complete, the latest estimate is a lot more agreeable.
[118] Four companies are now competing to design the successor to the Corolla Brooker with the winner set to be announced in mid 2026.
[119] That means we don't yet know what it's going to look like, but some details have been revealed.
[120] The city of Dresdon wants it to be a contemporary structure that also blends seamlessly into the historic cityscape with construction beginning in 2028 and finishing in 2031.
[121] That's a mere 7 years after the collapse, or twice as long as China took to build the world's highest bridge.
[122] Still, at least they'll eventually get it done.
[123] We have to shift the shock and the impact to the city to an advantage for the city.
[124] We have now the chance to rebuild the heart of the city in a very good way.
[125] There's no denying that Germany's once worldleading infrastructure is crumbling.
# Conclusion

[126] Over the last couple of years, the evidence to support that has been clear as day.
[127] But now we know why it's happening and there's a plan in place to get it fixed.
[128] Hopefully, Germans will soon be saying our feet to send to all those jokes about their inability to build things or keep them maintained.
[129] But only if the money that's been promised is used in the right way.
[130] Otherwise, it could be back to square.
[131] This video was sponsored by Brilliant.
[132] Don't forget to go and check them out at the link below.
[133] One of the best ways that you guys can support the work we do at this channel is by taking the time to go and check out our video sponsors.
[134] So, if you can do that, that would be fantasticish.
[135] And as always guys, if you enjoyed this video and you want to get more from the definitive video channel for construction, hit that subscribe button.