[2] 6 months later, a ring road in Berlin had to be closed after inspectors found a crack that had grown unexpectedly.
[16] And so we had quite a modern and advanced infrastructure if you look back to the 70s and 80s.
[18] >> We had a big push in infrastructure with uh the unification of Germany in the '90s.
[44] And if that's you, then I get it because I too love mastering how things work and learning how they can go very, very wrong like in the example we just heard.
[49] too. But if science isn't up your straza, then don't worry because they've got thousands of lessons in maths, programming, data analysis, and AI as well. To learn for free on Brilliant for a full 30 days, go to brilliant.org/theb1m.
[56] On entirely new projects, Germany's reputation has taken a bit of a hit as well. Brandenburgg Airport, also in the capital, famously took decades to open because it was marred by a bureaucracy and poor management.
[57] The same goes for other mega projects that remain ongoing like Stutgart 21 and Munich's new Esban line, both of which are hugely expensive and heavily delayed.
[71] One economic research institute claims that almost €19 billion has been set aside to support DB in just the first full year of the new fund, which is 2026.
[75] The northern access route of the Brena Base tunnel, which will be the world's longest underground rail connection when it completes, is in limbo over financial constraints.
[79] The Danish are building a new tunnel connecting the islands of Fa and Feiman and there won't be a connection available on the German side when they are ready.
[80] So if if you really look around, we are really frustrating our neighbors and uh so it's really a very disappointing situation.
[128] Hopefully, Germans will soon be saying our feet to send to all those jokes about their inability to build things or keep them maintained.