[38] building? Well, it's probably not who
[39] you think. Your first response would
[40] probably be, "Well, the Chrysler family,
[41] right? Or the car manufacturer." And
[42] yes, they did own it once. It was
[43] originally built and owned by
[44] the company's founder, Walter Krysler,
[45] in 1930, not by the Krysler
[46] Corporation itself. Walter Krysler
[47] intended the iconic skyscraper to remain
[48] a family asset and it did all the way up
[49] until 1953 when it was purchased by
[50] developer William Zeondorf, the man
[51] behind the UN headquarters and the guy
[52] responsible for reshaping much of
[53] Manhattan during the 50s and 60s. He

[77] The land was bought as a way to help
[78] fund the college. Because of
[79] this asset and the rent, they've been
[80] able to collect millions and millions of
[81] dollars over the years. They are able or
[82] have been able to keep the school free
[83] for a long time.

[222] one final move. Hidden inside the crown
[223] was a secret spire assembled in sections
[224] out of sight. Once 40 Wall Street had
[225] topped out, the spire of the Chrysler
[226] building was hoisted up through the roof
[227] and locked into place, adding 36 m in a
[228] single stroke. Overnight, the Krysler

[263] towers. This is a great building, but it
[264] also needs a lot of love. Like, it needs
[265] a lot of work to be brought into the
[266] 21st century so that it can compete for
[267] A+ tenants with the likes of all these
[268] new buildings popping up around New
[269] York. You know, it's a gorgeous building

[355] So guys, if you love the B1M, if you
[356] love these stories, if you love learning
[357] more about construction in a
[358] downto-earth way that's easy to
[359] understand and can be read by anyone, go
[360] and pre-order my book, Mega Builds,
[361] today.

[383] As one of London's most recognizable
[384] industrial landmarks, its cultural
[385] significance ultimately secured its
[386] future. Even after decades of
[387] dereliction and a string of failed
[388] schemes
[389] by becoming a mixeduse destination, the
[390] power station was able to fund its
[391] own survival. Today, it's a
[392] thriving hot spot for this city.

[411] Imagine living inside the most famous
[412] crown in the world. So, the Woolworth
[413] building famously underwent a condo
[414] conversion on the top floors, but it's
[415] been a complete disaster of a condo
[416] conversion. There have been others that
[417] are seemingly more promising. The Flat
[418] Iron Building, again, another iconic
[419] building,
[420] so synonymous with the New York skyline,
[421] that is being converted to boutique
[422] condos. And so far, sales have been have

[424] This is a problem we're going to see a
[425] lot more of. For the first time in
[426] history, we're seeing century old
[427] skyscrapers, and we can't just tear them
[428] down. First off, it would be
[429] tremendously difficult to knock down any
[430] of these buildings. These first
[431] skyscrapers were overengineered because
[432] nothing had been built that tall before.
