[1] Ah, Paris, the most romantic city in the
[2] world. This place has got it all. Fine
[3] foods, high culture, and most
[4] importantly, exquisite buildings. Yes, a
[5] city doesn't get a reputation like this
[6] for nothing, you know. It's
[7] unblenmished.
[8] Sorry, where was I? Oh, yes, among the
[9] monuments and gilded sculptures, you can
[10] really lose yourself. What is that
[11] again, guys? Sorry. What is this doing
[12] in my script? Let me just check my notes
[13] a minute. Hang on.
[14] Oh, okay.
[15] This is the Tormon Panass. It was the
[16] first skyscraper ever built in Paris,
[17] and it's a whopper. It's 210 m high and
[18] offers 120,000 m of office space in one
[19] of Paris's most historic neighborhoods.
[20] And the locals hate it. In fact, they
[21] hate it so much just a few years after
[22] it was completed, a law was passed
[23] banning anything like it from ever being
[24] built again. But fortunately, a plan is
[25] underway to transform it from
[26] the Phantom of the Opera into the Bell
[27] of the Ball. That plan, well, they're
[28] going to make it invisible.
[29] Europe doesn't really do skyscrapers. In
[30] fact, there are more in New York City
[31] than there are across the entire
[32] European continent.
[33] There's no city that better displays
[34] this than Paris, which has a rather
[35] complicated history with tall buildings.
[36] That story starts here at the Tormon
[37] Panass. The blowback from this block was
[38] so strong that in 1977, just 4 years
[39] after it was completed, French President
[40] Jagard Stang introduced a ban on
[41] building anything over 25 m in the
[42] center of Paris. that lasted 33 years
[43] before being repealed which left just
[44] enough time to start work on
[45] this the tour triangler before everyone
[46] decided they hated that as well and in
[47] 2023 the ban was put back in place you
[48] will find plenty of skyscrapers here in
[49] Lafon the city's central business
[50] district 9 km away from the city center
[51] beyond the outer ring road and looking
[52] around you can see why Parisians are so
[53] keen on saying no to skyscrapers
[54] there are a few other major cities
[55] anywhere in the world that have kept
[56] such a uniform architectural style which
[57] is key to giving Paris its devivver but
[58] that's today back in the 1950s things
[59] were very different the city was rundown
[60] shabby and even at its best was hardly
[61] fit for purpose
[62] but that's not the only thing that's not
[63] fit for purpose you could also say that
[64] about the way we get our news I don't
[65] know about you but I find it's easy to
[66] sometimes get your news by just doom
[67] scrolling through social media but
[68] that's no good the way we consume
[69] information is getting increasingly
[70] partisan with misinformation and fake
[71] news becoming scarily common, especially
[72] with the rise of AI. And that's a huge
[73] part of why I've loved working with
[74] Straight Arrow News for over a year now.
[75] You've probably heard me mention a few
[76] times how it's different to other news
[77] apps, because it brings you reporting
[78] from a wide range of media outlets on
[79] both sides of the political divide. But
[80] there's a really crucial benefit because
[81] whether you're on the left, the right,
[82] or somewhere in between, the chances are
[83] you're missing important stories because
[84] of editorial bias. Stratar News has a
[85] feature called Media Miss, which reports
[86] on a huge range of stories and analyzes
[87] who else is or isn't covering them.
[88] Honestly, go and search any story that's
[89] happening right now, and they'll give
[90] you a score showing you who's under or
[91] over reporting on the issue. It's
[92] amazing to see how much we can miss from
[93] being in our echo chambers. With a
[94] certified balance rating from All Sides
[95] Media, Straight Hour News is putting the
[96] trust back into journalism, which is
[97] great if, like me, you're interested in
[98] making up your own mind about things
[99] rather than being told what to think. If
[100] you want a news source that gives it to
[101] you straight, then download the Straight
[102] Arrow News app using the QR code on
[103] screen. It's completely free, and you'll
[104] be massively helping us by taking the
[105] time to go and check out one of our
[106] video sponsors. Now, let's get back to
[107] Perry. As a new world began to emerge
[108] from the wreckage of the Second World
[109] War, so did new ways of living and
[110] working. Paris's elegant apartments and
[111] endless monuments were far from an
[112] asset. They were a sign of a city that
[113] was kind of stuck in the past.
[114] Elsewhere, places like London and New
[115] York were building modern offices fit
[116] for the demands of the new economy. But
[117] Paris was still a city of workshops and
[118] studios, and it was beginning to get
[119] left behind. Paris is very much about uh
[120] artisal crafts which is a long history
[121] that goes back to the medieval period.
[122] But so in the 60s you have the move to
[123] decentralize and that's something that's
[124] happening um in the wake of the war as
[125] well. So if you think of the Marshall
[126] plan and what's happening in terms of
[127] reconstruction after the war, it's not
[128] necessarily focused on Paris. It's
[129] focused on other parts of the country.
[130] >> Enter Senator and State Prefect Edgar
[131] Bazani. He wanted to create a modern
[132] destination in the heart of the city
[133] that would attract office workers back
[134] into Paris and show that it was capable
[135] of competing with other major global
[136] cities. The place he chose was this Mont
[137] Panas. Now, few places could have better
[138] illustrated the transformation from old
[139] to new as this storied
[140] neighborhood. The area was named after
[141] the home for Greek muses and had once
[142] been a favorite haunt of artists
[143] who would rent tables in the nearby
[144] caferies for a few teams. The walls of
[145] Laurata were once decorated with
[146] sketches by penalist artists in lie of
[147] payments.
[148] >> You know, you have to imagine like Mopas
[149] was went from um a literary artistic
[150] center. We have all the great artists
[151] there um in the the 1920s and
[152] 30s. It becomes like a jazz maybe a
[153] little bit more of a seedy uh element.
[154] So there is this push to try to clean
[155] up these, if you will, poorer
[156] areas and infuse it with something
[157] that's modern.
[158] >> At its center was the G manassess, which
[159] you may recognize from this.
[160] But in the 1950s, the station
[161] was bringing a very different crowd into
[162] the area. Commuters. Every day 50,000
[163] people and a few cats poured into the
[164] neighborhood, and the grand old
[165] building was struggling to keep up. For
[166] Pasani, this was an opportunity to clear
[167] out the old and let fresh air into the
[168] city. In 1959, he unveiled the main
[169] Montanas plan, a vast new district to be
[170] built in four separate phases. Phase one
[171] would see two new housing blocks built
[172] either side of the station.
[173] Phase three would see the creation of a
[174] shopping mall and the all-important
[175] skyscraper, while the station itself
[176] would get a redevelopment under phase 4.
[177] By 1966, the station and housing
[178] were complete. But the new skyscraper,
[179] as well as being the most controversial
[180] aspect of the plan, was proving to be
[181] the most difficult. Now, building a
[182] skyscraper today is challenging, but we
[183] kind of take for granted that it is
[184] possible. But when the main panass plan
[185] was dreamed up in 1959, that was far
[186] from guaranteed. The development was
[187] being led by the French government,
[188] which had no experience constructing
[189] such a huge building. And it wasn't just
[190] the engineering that was new. So were
[191] the economics that made this possible.
[192] For the solution, they turned to an
[193] American real estate developer, Wy
[194] Tuttle. The initial plan was for a 150 m
[195] tower surrounded by a shopping mall and
[196] a smaller office block. But the
[197] stateowned company in charge of the
[198] development struggled to find the 65
[199] million Franks needed to cover the
[200] construction. Under Tuttle, the plans
[201] for the tower grew another 60 m,
[202] bringing the building to a staggering 59
[203] stories. Extra space meant more tenants,
[204] enabling Tuttle to generate the finance
[205] to cover the build. In 1970, 11 years
[206] after the plan was first drawn up,
[207] construction began. But while the
[208] business case had been resolved,
[209] Tuttles's engineers still had huge
[210] problems to overcome.
[211] This is the site laid out for the
[212] construction of the tower. And these are
[213] the metro lines that run just beneath
[214] the surface. One in particular, line
[215] six, runs directly under the tower's
[216] footprint. The enormous weight of this
[217] skyscraper and the soft soil meant that
[218] placing it around the line would cause
[219] the soil to subside and the tunnel to
[220] collapse. The only way of avoiding this
[221] was to build the 122,000 ton structure
[222] directly over the metro line and spread
[223] the weight evenly on each side. To do
[224] that, the tunnel would obviously need to
[225] be reinforced. Concrete walls were
[226] constructed on either side of the rail
[227] tracks, strong enough to protect the
[228] tunnel and bear some of the building
[229] load. Above, four concrete beams were
[230] installed to strengthen the roof,
[231] capable of taking 40,000 tons of weight.
[232] Piles were sunk either side of this to
[233] secure the building's foundation, but
[234] the soil beneath the tunnel threw up
[235] further problems. This area had
[236] historically been used for quarrying,
[237] leaving the subs soil with large,
[238] loosely packed areas of dirt. The piles
[239] therefore needed to be dug down to an
[240] incredible depth, 60 m, nearly a third
[241] of the height of the building, all to
[242] reach a more stable stratum of clay. 56
[243] piles were dug into the Mana soil in
[244] total using an incredible volume of
[245] concrete. 12,000 cubic meters of it were
[246] used to fill the piles, just over a
[247] quarter of the total volume of concrete
[248] used in the entire building. For this
[249] new type of structure, Tuttles's team
[250] turned to a new type of construction. It
[251] involves designing the building around a
[252] concrete core containing space for
[253] stairs, lifts, and surfaces. Around this
[254] stands a steel superructure holding the
[255] building's floor plates. Then last of
[256] all, the cladding is added.
[257] Now today, nearly every new building is
[258] constructed using this method. But at
[259] the time, it made use of a relatively
[260] new technique called slip forming. It
[261] had been developed in the US in the
[262] early 20th century to build agricultural
[263] structures like silos. But by the 1960s,
[264] it was being used in high-rise
[265] buildings. It works by constructing a
[266] mold which concrete is continuously
[267] poured into. As the lower layers set,
[268] hydraulic jacks push the mold up,
[269] creating a continuously growing
[270] building. Now, one of the biggest
[271] benefits of slip form construction is
[272] the speed. The core of the torm pan was
[273] under construction 24/7, growing at a
[274] rate of around 30 cm every day. By 1973,
[275] the tower was nearing completion, but
[276] down at ground level, mines were already
[277] made up.
[278] >> The tormon paness was supposed to
[279] represent a new vital Paris rising up
[280] out of the smoky old-fashioned city. But
[281] there was a problem. Everyone quite
[282] liked the smoky old-fashioned city.
[283] >> Even today, it's an incredibly
[284] homogeneous city. Imagine Paris is
[285] created largely of limestone. It's local
[286] limestone. So you get that idea of the
[287] palace city with a uniformity of
[288] materials which is something that
[289] Houseman is kind of regulating. There's
[290] a uniformity of facades.
[291] Everything is is that that homogeneous
[292] kind of uh structure. And here we have
[293] the antithesis. We have something that's
[294] quite dark with darkened glass that is a
[295] mono block. I don't think I've met one
[296] Parian that likes it. Stop us if you've
[297] heard this one before, but Paris owes
[298] much of its aesthetic to this man, Baron
[299] Osman. Drawing inspiration from London's
[300] Regent Streets, Osman extensively
[301] remodeled Paris between 1853 and
[302] 1870, transforming it from a medieval
[303] city of timber frame buildings into the
[304] neocclassical style we will see today.
[305] The most visible legacy of this
[306] are the city's long straight boulevards
[307] and the apartment block, a six or
[308] sevenstory building in cream limestone
[309] with commercial space at the bottom and
[310] a gray mansard roof. It gives the whole
[311] city a fairly uniform building height
[312] which creates a sense of scale that the
[313] tower fell well foul of. You have
[314] a scale that goes from scale
[315] limits are around 30 31 and then they go
[316] up to 37 m. And here we've got a
[317] building that goes up to 210 m tall. I
[318] mean it's just it sticks out. So
[319] in terms of its scale, it's just it's
[320] just radical. It's like a stella, right?
[321] It's meant to be seen from from wherever
[322] you are in Paris. just a different
[323] concept of the way in which um
[324] Paris functions.
[325] >> As if that wasn't bad enough, by
[326] standing so tall amid such a low-rise
[327] city, the tower also loomed
[328] conspicuously into view around some of
[329] Paris's most cherished landmarks.
[330] With such a strong classical identity,
[331] it's kind of inevitable that anything
[332] new is going to stick out, which
[333] goes some way to explain Parisian's
[334] historical antagonism towards new
[335] structures. The Pompedu Center, the Louv
[336] Pyramids, and even the Eiffel Tower were
[337] all widely criticized before eventually
[338] becoming iconic landmarks. I'd
[339] say there are preachers that lament the
[340] fact that um because there are no big
[341] towers within the center of Paris. Um
[342] that you um that it's it's
[343] stagnated. Paris is becomes the city of
[344] tourists, right? Um, and this is one of
[345] the critiques if you go back to um,
[346] Housemen, the poor are being pushed out
[347] of the city.
[348] >> In the 2010s, various politicians and
[349] meal hopefuls were openly calling for
[350] the tower to be demolished.
[351] Until in 2017, the reduced tower was
[352] thrown a lifeline. A plan was approved
[353] for a full-scale renovation based on a
[354] design by a consortium of architects,
[355] Newvel AOM. The design makes a huge
[356] effort to break up the monolithic
[357] presence of the old building. Bands of
[358] sky gardens create more horizontal
[359] features than effort to break up the
[360] solid verticality of the old structure.
[361] Today, the skyscraper is battled by
[362] strong winds that race up against its
[363] huge sailike exterior. But the new
[364] design uses that to its advantage,
[365] creating openings in the facade that
[366] allow this air to naturally ventilate
[367] the building. But the elephant in the
[368] room or rather on the facade is the
[369] transparent glazing which helps the
[370] tower to well blend in.
[371] >> Yeah, it's so it looks pretty right.
[372] It looks uh it looks like it's
[373] going to be a nice version of a um of
[374] the toas, but my inner historian
[375] questions that radical makeover. But I I
[376] don't know, you know, will we lament
[377] this, you know, iconic, love it
[378] or hate it, most people hate it, of
[379] course, building.
[380] Couldn't it have retained its uh
[381] revetment and maybe had some kind of at
[382] least, okay, you've got the form, but at
[383] least that um certain elements
[384] uh kind of preserved. It's hard to say,
[385] you know, it seems pretty inattractive,
[386] but I feel like maybe we might be
[387] losing something a bit more.
[388] Work's due to begin on the renovation
[389] next year, at which point the tower is
[390] going to be stripped back to its core
[391] and steel frame. After that, the big
[392] question is, will it work? [snorts] Is
[393] the old tower the ugly duckling growing
[394] into a graceful swan? Or is the only way
[395] to get Parisians to love this building
[396] to make it disappear?
[397] Remember guys, if you want to get the
[398] news without the usual bias, then get
[399] involved in Straight Hour News via the
[400] link below. And as always guys, if you
[401] enjoyed this video and you want to get
[402] more from the definitive video channel
[403] for construction, make sure you're
[404] subscribed to the B1M.