[1] Ah, Paris, the most romantic city in the
[2] world. This place has got it all. Fine
[3] foods, high culture, and most
[4] importantly, exquisite buildings. Yes, a

[10] really lose yourself. What is that
[11] again, guys? Sorry. What is this doing
[12] in my script? Let me just check my notes
[13] a minute. Hang on.
[14] Oh, okay.

[47] 2023 the ban was put back in place you
[48] will find plenty of skyscrapers here in
[49] Lafon the city's central business
[50] district 9 km away from the city center
[51] beyond the outer ring road and looking
[52] around you can see why Parisians are so
[53] keen on saying no to skyscrapers

[75] You've probably heard me mention a few
[76] times how it's different to other news
[77] apps, because it brings you reporting
[78] from a wide range of media outlets on
[79] both sides of the political divide. But

[93] being in our echo chambers. With a
[94] certified balance rating from All Sides
[95] Media, Straight Hour News is putting the
[96] trust back into journalism, which is
[97] great if, like me, you're interested in
[98] making up your own mind about things
[99] rather than being told what to think. If

[122] But so in the 60s you have the move to
[123] decentralize and that's something that's
[124] happening um in the wake of the war as
[125] well. So if you think of the Marshall

[296] Parian that likes it. Stop us if you've
[297] heard this one before, but Paris owes
[298] much of its aesthetic to this man, Baron
[299] Osman. Drawing inspiration from London's
[300] Regent Streets, Osman extensively
[301] remodeled Paris between 1853 and
[302] 1870, transforming it from a medieval
[303] city of timber frame buildings into the
[304] neocclassical style we will see today.
