[1] This is somewhere no human being was
[2] ever meant to go. Deep in the foothills
[3] of the Himalayas, temperatures near
[4] Reesei vary in the extremes, dropping
[5] from 50° C all the way down to freezing.
[6] Everywhere you look, jagged cliff faces
[7] create these deep, dangerous canyons.
[8] You can imagine the challenge faced by
[9] crews attempting to build a
[10] record-breaking bridge here.
[11] To access civilization, you have to trek
[12] the dusty tracks by foot or take a boat
[13] journey along the river. Simply getting
[14] to the Janab Bridge site was an enormous
[15] undertaking, let alone maneuvering the
[16] 30,000 tons of steel necessary to build
[17] it.
[18] No motorways, no nearby factories, and
[19] not a flat, stable surface in sight.
[20] This is construction in one of mother
[21] nature's most unforgiving environments.
[22] It might sound a bit cliche, but
[23] sometimes cliches do ring true.
[24] Constructing Chennab Bridge should have
[25] been impossible. From searing
[26] temperatures to dangerous ice and snow,
[27] working conditions really don't come
[28] much tougher than this. And it's not
[29] just the crews who suffer. When it's
[30] exposed to extreme temperatures, steel
[31] can expand and contract, making it
[32] really difficult to manipulate and
[33] accurately line up. But the truth is,
[34] while crews are battling the snow and
[35] the sun, there's an even bigger
[36] challenge looming, and that is the wind.
[37] You see, this canyon can experience
[38] gusts of up to 165 mph. Now, that's
[39] unbelievably dangerous for people
[40] working hundreds of meters up in the
[41] mountains as it is, let alone when you
[42] consider the fact they're maneuvering
[43] thousands of tons of steel into place.
[44] And even if the weather decides to take
[45] it easy on you from above, there's no
[46] guarantee an earthquake won't shake the
[47] ground to its core. Any one of these
[48] factors in their own right could have
[49] put a stop to the notion of building a
[50] canyon crossing bridge in this location.
[51] And still they pale in comparison to the
[52] main challenge of Chinab Bridge,
[53] actually getting to the construction
[54] site.
[55] >> When we first started the project, we
[56] were invited to go up and donkeys were
[57] provided to help us get up the stream.
[58] >> David McKenzie is the senior technical
[59] director for Kovi and has been involved
[60] with the project since 2004.
[61] >> Uh the first trip on the way out, we
[62] took a boat on the way out cuz it was
[63] quicker by boat down the river than it
[64] was to try and negotiate these torturous
[65] mountain parts. Okay, so this is why
[66] Chennab bridge is being constructed in
[67] the first place. Imagine you're in Jammu
[68] and you want to get over to Kashmir
[69] Valley. They're separated by mountains
[70] and connected by one main artery,
[71] National Highway 44, which is regularly
[72] blocked by snow. And that's where the
[73] Chinab bridge comes in. It's just one
[74] impressive section of India's new 169m
[75] all weather rail line cuts quite
[76] literally through the mountains.
[77] And as if the weather conditions for
[78] this construction team weren't
[79] challenging enough, not everyone
[80] supports this new route. Kashmir is an
[81] area of high political tension and it's
[82] one of the most militarized zones in the
[83] world, divided between India and
[84] Pakistan.
[85] >> Both claim territory in the region and
[86] administer different parts of it. While
[87] India says its new all-weather rail line
[88] will give the area an economic boost and
[89] improve travel connections, opponents
[90] claim it's being used as a way of
[91] exerting more control over the region.
[92] But despite these concerns, construction
[93] of the line has plowed on. All in all,
[94] this thing features an incredible 943
[95] bridges and 36 tunnels, one of which is
[96] 7 mi long. And apparently allin reports
[97] suggest that it's going to cost a mere
[98] $5 billion. Now, for context on that, in
[99] New York, $5 billion
[100] would get you 2 miles of Second Avenue
[101] subway.
[102] Now, when seemingly every project we
[103] look at costs millions, if not billions
[104] of dollars, it's easy to lose
[105] perspective over the scale of money
[106] that's being talked about. $2 billion on
[107] a skyscraper here, $10 billion on a
[108] railway over there, and sometimes these
[109] projects can run into the trillions.
[110] Balancing those checkbooks would bring
[111] most of us out in a cold sweat. In fact,
[112] I feel a bit sick just thinking about
[113] it. But if you want to say goodbye to
[114] headaches, then say hello to ODU, an
[115] all-in-one business management platform
[116] providing more than 45 apps to help you
[117] stay on top of business. ODO's
[118] accounting app designed with
[119] accessibility at heart not only offers
[120] peace of mind that your money is being
[121] processed properly, it also cuts the
[122] faf. You can create unlimited invoices
[123] in seconds. Then by syncing your bank
[124] accounts, ODU monitors payments
[125] and even sends automatic follow-ups to
[126] late payers. Smart AI recognizes supply
[127] invoice data, further slashing your
[128] manual tasks. And you even get access to
[129] intuitive dashboards to make tracking
[130] your financial data easier than ever. It
[131] doesn't matter where you are either. The
[132] app caters to your local tax
[133] regulations, helping to keep you
[134] compliant and law-abiding. But
[135] here's the catch. There isn't one. ODO
[136] will let you try out their accounting
[137] app for free. And with unlimited hosting
[138] and support, you can't really go wrong
[139] to try your first ODO app for free. Head
[140] to the link in the description. It
[141] massively helps us out here at the B1M
[142] when you guys take the time to go and
[143] check out our video sponsors. So, please
[144] do do that at the end of the video. Now,
[145] from managing your money to managing a
[146] mega bridge in the Himalayas, let's get
[147] back to Chinab. This is the Chennab
[148] Bridge work site in 2020. And on either
[149] side of the canyon, you'll notice these
[150] fabrication workshops. You wouldn't
[151] usually find them on modern construction
[152] sites. Usually on a project this big,
[153] key components would be pre-fabricated
[154] in factories far away and then
[155] maneuvered to sight. But as we
[156] mentioned, that wasn't an option here.
[157] So, right about now, you're probably
[158] asking yourself, well, if this project's
[159] so hard to get to, then how the hell did
[160] they get 30,000 tons of steel up there?
[161] And the answer is pretty extraordinary.
[162] just to make this extraordinary location
[163] even remotely accessible. They put in 26
[164] km worth of roads just for this project.
[165] But if you're prone to travel sickness,
[166] I'd advise you look away now because
[167] these roads were built in some pretty
[168] precarious locations, clinging to the
[169] side of mountains and going along some
[170] serious cliff edges.
[171] >> The most efficient way of transporting
[172] steel is in flat plate. Think of it as
[173] an IKEA catalog. Everything came to
[174] sight flat packed and indeed all the
[175] cutting and all the drilling was done on
[176] site.
[177] >> And don't expect things to get much
[178] easier when you've reached the site.
[179] Once you finally have all the materials
[180] on location, then comes the small issue
[181] of building the bridge hundreds of
[182] meters above the ground over a massive
[183] canyon. The topography here is nothing
[184] short of a nightmare. A jagged rocky
[185] canyon split by a river makes for some
[186] beautiful views, but an incredibly
[187] tricky engineering job.
[188] As I mentioned earlier, one of the
[189] biggest factors is the wind, thanks to a
[190] phenomenon known as the Venturi effect.
[191] That's when a narrow passage like a
[192] canyon effectively becomes a giant
[193] funnel. As wind passes through, its
[194] pressure drops as its speed increases,
[195] creating powerful and chaotic patterns.
[196] And that's all before we've discussed
[197] the terrain. In geological terms, the
[198] Himalayas are very young and they're
[199] still moving. The range was forced up by
[200] the Indian and Eurasian plates driving
[201] into each other, creating a heavily
[202] twisted landscape. The rock along its
[203] canyons is fractured and fryable. Now,
[204] by nature, a canyon is kind of a
[205] V-shape. And the problem is, if you fix
[206] a tower to one side of that V-shape,
[207] particularly one side that's got very
[208] unstable rock conditions, there's a
[209] tendency for that tower to want to slide
[210] down the valley and slip. Which is why
[211] the Chennap Bridge is an arch design. It
[212] starts from either end and both sides
[213] meet in the middle, creating a locked
[214] formation like this. As they meet in the
[215] middle, the two sides push against each
[216] other and force their weight down their
[217] legs into the sides of the mountain. So,
[218] I mentioned that a canyon acts a bit
[219] like a wind funnel, creating these
[220] powerful gust patterns. Usually, you'd
[221] create a model of the structure, in this
[222] case a bridge, and then put a scaled
[223] down version of it to the test in a wind
[224] tunnel. And while that was done here
[225] with about a 1 to 50 scale model, the
[226] unique topography called for some more
[227] drastic research. What we then did was
[228] some uh localized tests, both physical
[229] tests, but also computational tests. So
[230] we model the environment around it, all
[231] the hills, the valleys. So then we could
[232] actually then calculate what are the
[233] accelerated flows locally because of
[234] course they push up the net wind
[235] speed. So there's an acceleration of
[236] 20%, your maximum wind speed of say 50
[237] m/s is now 60 70 m/s. So you've got to
[238] take those things into account and
[239] that's the important thing was done here
[240] was to do those particular studies
[241] because they were very important to the
[242] design.
[243] >> Now the ability to stabilize this bridge
[244] with an incredibly strong arch is
[245] crucial but it's stretching over a
[246] canyon hundreds of meters above the
[247] river down below. To actually build it,
[248] crews had to first construct a cable
[249] crane. It's a bit like an aerial trapze
[250] or a monorail made of cables. Towers are
[251] constructed on either side of the canyon
[252] and a cable connects them.
[253] Pieces of steel for the arch are winched
[254] across on the cable crane into their
[255] correct location. Each side of the arch
[256] is then built from the bottom upwards,
[257] held back by cables that are locked into
[258] the rock to stop it all from falling
[259] nearly 400 m down into the river
[260] below. And once complete, hey presto,
[261] you've got an arch. Now, the arch is the
[262] key component supporting the entire
[263] bridge structure. But obviously, it's
[264] not fit for a train to go across it just
[265] yet. Once the supporting towers are
[266] erected, that's when the top deck comes
[267] into play, and it's a pretty heavy
[268] components. The top deck is a flat piece
[269] of the bridge that's constructed in
[270] sections. Basically, working from each
[271] side of the canyon, a piece of the
[272] bridge deck is laid. Then another piece
[273] is put in behind it, then another piece
[274] behind that, and so on and so on, and
[275] gradually the bridge deck is pushed out
[276] across the canyon until the two sides
[277] meet in the middle. It's what's known as
[278] a launch methodology.
[279] What's cool is that this structure is so
[280] big that the scale of earthquakes
[281] generally experienced here shouldn't be
[282] too much of an issue for it in
[283] comparison. But that's more than just a
[284] stroke of luck. Engineers here were well
[285] aware this area faces some pretty
[286] intense seismic activity.
[287] >> When you get bridges of this size,
[288] curiously, if you imagine the ground is
[289] shaking, but in proportion to the size
[290] and span of the structure, that shaking
[291] is actually quite small. If you have the
[292] span relatively that shaking is twice as
[293] much because the shaking is a fixed
[294] amount. So the ground shakes by let's
[295] say plus or minus 10 cm. But if the
[296] bridge is 100 m long if you double it to
[297] 200 m long of course then the relative
[298] effect diminishes. So actually the
[299] seismic is less of an impact on the main
[300] arch but it does affect all the rest of
[301] the approach structures.
[302] >> It goes without saying the stability of
[303] the top deck is crucial. The safety of
[304] trains has to be central to the
[305] project's construction. And one of the
[306] key environmental threats to the
[307] bridge's stability is one that is
[308] experienced around the world, although
[309] maybe less so in the UK. The sunshine.
[310] If you were paying attention, you
[311] remember I said right at the start of
[312] this video that temperatures at Chinab
[313] Bridge vary from freezing all the way up
[314] to a scorching 50° C. And that impacts
[315] the steel that the bridge arch is made
[316] of. The big problem with a canyon is
[317] that the sun can only shine on sections
[318] of the bridge at any one time, meaning
[319] it'll need to operate at different
[320] temperatures.
[321] Now, as the bridge arch warms and cools,
[322] it bends and flexes, which isn't great
[323] for moving trains. But to get around
[324] that, the rails have been pre-stressed.
[325] They've been pulled really tight for
[326] stability. They're also allowed to move
[327] freely of their fixings on the bridge.
[328] So, the fixings that are on the bridge
[329] have the rails sitting in them, but
[330] they're not actually attached. So the
[331] rails can move back and forth as the
[332] bridge moves over time.
[333] Designed by the WSP team in Finland, the
[334] arch and its towers loom over Chinab
[335] River. The rock and steel blend in with
[336] the mountainous backdrop and in doing so
[337] offer some of the best train passenger
[338] views on the planet.
[339] >> Yeah, I've been fortunate, very
[340] fortunate to work on a number of very
[341] exciting structures in my lifetime. Um,
[342] but this one holds particular passion
[343] for me because it's having seen it from
[344] ground up over a 20-year period, having
[345] seen, you know, where it's been built,
[346] quality with which it's been built as
[347] well, it's incredible how well it's been
[348] fabricated in in the yard really is an
[349] incredible piece of engineering. And I
[350] think just looking at the pictures as I
[351] am on my screen in front of me, it
[352] really does target the heart springs as
[353] being, you know, the ch the challenge I
[354] am most interested in. The proof is I
[355] have it on my laptop every day to look
[356] at it.
[357] The line was inaugurated in summer last
[358] year, as India begins its next chapter
[359] of connectivity. And while Chennab
[360] bridge is just one part of a number of
[361] rail projects across this country, it
[362] might be the most impressive. [snorts]
[363] To create this bridge, construction
[364] teams had to build where no one else has
[365] built before. And yet, through
[366] determination and innovation, they've
[367] made it a reality.
[368] More than 20 years after construction
[369] first began, following delays and
[370] complications, boat journeys, and
[371] trekking on donkeys, cable cranes, and
[372] miles of purpose-built roads,
[373] construction crews found a way. The
[374] Chennad Bridge is a perfect example of
[375] the hardships faced by construction
[376] teams working in some of our planet's
[377] most extraordinary environments. The
[378] enormous effort invested to create
[379] structures like this paves the way for
[380] future generations and proves once again
[381] what the amazing construction industry
[382] is capable of.
[383] This video was sponsored by ODU. Want to
[384] say a huge thank you to them for their
[385] support. Please do click the link, go
[386] and find out more about ODO and get
[387] involved in what is a fantastic
[388] platform. And as always guys, if you
[389] enjoyed this video and you want to get
[390] more from the definitive video channel
[391] for construction, hit that subscribe
[392] button.