[10] he needed. He was heavily in debt and
[11] had decided to stake not just his
[12] reputation but his personal fortune on
[13] building an amusement park, something
[14] which was normally free to enter. But he
[15] needn't have worried. By combining
[16] technical wizardry with the magic of the
[17] big screen, Disney had hit upon his most
[18] consequential innovation yet, one that
[19] would transform his dwindling kingdom
[20] into a global empire.

[60] When researching other parks, Disney
[61] found that one of their weaknesses was
[62] they often lacked a coherent plan,
[63] making them pretty confusing to
[64] navigate. If he were to create the
[65] happiest place on earth, it would have
[66] to be simple to get around. And to do
[67] that, Disney had to meticulously design
[68] the flow of people as well as the
[69] attractions. And that all began at the
[70] entrance.

[166] During the design phase, engineers had
[167] taken the model apart for cleaning, only
[168] to quickly reassemble it when Walt
[169] Disney came to visit. In the rush, they
[170] put the palace back on the wrong way
[171] round. Disney noticed the mistake, but
[172] actually preferred the way it looked and
[173] had the castle built as the model stood.

[178] The Jungle Cruise has become one of the
[179] most popular rides of Disneyland and has
[180] since been replicated at other Disney
[181] parks. Designing a ride like this today
[182] requires months of planning and design
[183] work by huge teams of people. But back
[184] in 1954, the ride's layout was solely
[185] down to this man, legendary art director
[186] Harper Goff.

[198] lose everything. As Disney's ambitions
[199] for the park grew, so did the bill to
[200] pay for it all. By the time construction
[201] began, he'd taken out $17 million in
[202] loans, equivalent to over $600 million
[203] today. He even put his personal fortune
[204] on the line, selling properties and
[205] cashing in his life insurance to raise
[206] funds. In 1954, he had the financing in

[237] Fowler, meanwhile, was a retired admiral
[238] and a veteran of both World Wars. He'd
[239] spent the last few decades overseeing
[240] the construction of warships for the
[241] Navy. Initially, he'd been drafted in to
[242] oversee the construction of the Mark
[243] Twain steamboat, but his ability to
[244] wrangle logistics made him invaluable to
[245] the wider construction effort of the
[246] park.

[253] Together, Fowler and Wood adopted a
[254] strategy that prioritized the important
[255] storytelling aspects of the park while
[256] finding ways to cut corners and find
[257] efficiencies elsewhere. Their aim wasn't
[258] perfection. Instead, they raced to get
[259] everything good enough for opening day
[260] with a view to continue work afterwards.

[266] But among the cost-saving and
[267] improvisation, there were some truly
[268] impressive innovations. Do you notice
[269] anything special about this bolard or
[270] this fence? Well, it might be that as
[271] you're walking through, you don't notice
[272] anything at all. Despite their best
[273] efforts, Disney's team wasn't able to
[274] banish the outside world completely.
[275] Things like rubbish bins and utilities
[276] weren't part of the fantasy script, but
[277] were still essential to the park. To
[278] solve this, his imagineers created a new
[279] color that would help unwanted features
[280] blend in with the planting scheme around
[281] the park. They named it Go Away Green.

[404] Don't forget that we're inspiring the
[405] next generation of builders through our
[406] investment into Brick Borrow, a
[407] fantastic LEGO subscription service. You
[408] can learn more and get started today
[409] over at brickbarrow.com.
[410] And as always guys, if you enjoyed this
[411] video and you want to get more from the
[412] definitive video channel for
[413] construction, make sure you subscribe to
[414] the B1M.
