[1] Tucked away in the mountains of Colorado
[2] is one of America's most unusual
[3] construction projects.
[4] This here is the Gross Reservoir, which
[5] has been supplying the city of Denver
[6] with much of its water for more than
[7] half a century.
[8] But not enough water. With more demand
[9] on the system than ever before, and
[10] natural disasters becoming increasingly
[11] likely, this man-made lake now
[12] needs to be a lot bigger.
[13] It's reasonable to assume a
[14] reservoir can only be as big as the dam
[15] that created it, which is why teams here
[16] are having to pull off a rare and
[17] difficult task first. They're
[18] expanding the dam itself by building a
[19] new one on top of it.
[20] >> Well, this is really the first time that
[21] a gravity dam is being transformed into
[22] an arch dam. And it's incredibly unique,
[23] incredibly complex.
[24] And yet, with the finish line now in
[25] sight, there's a serious problem that
[26] won't go away. One that's already seen
[27] this gigantic scheme stopped in its
[28] tracks.
[29] Think Colorado, and you'll probably
[30] imagine something like this.
[31] Just outside Denver is where the Rocky
[32] Mountains begin and where a great deal
[33] of water can be found. There are lakes,
[34] reservoirs, the Colorado River, and its
[35] tributaries, all within reach. It's a
[36] good place to be if you like the quiet
[37] life. Except that is for this particular
[38] site, which has become a hive of
[39] activity in recent years. Back in the
[40] 1950s, a large gravity dam was built
[41] here to serve the Denver metropolitan
[42] area. Due to its rising population, the
[43] city needed a new water source to keep
[44] up with increased demand and resources.
[45] And so the gross reservoir was born.
[46] But reservoirs don't just fill up on
[47] their own. Of course, a massive wall of
[48] concrete, the Gross Dam, had to be built
[49] first.
[50] It would capture water coming in mainly
[51] from the Fraser River, which joins onto
[52] the mighty Colorado River via the Muffet
[53] Tunnel. Okay, but before we move on, and
[54] because I just can't ignore anymore, why
[55] is it called the Gross Reservoir?
[56] >> Gross. Well, no, it's not because it's
[57] disgusting or because of its size, which
[58] is pretty substantial.
[59] >> Freaking idiot.
[60] >> It's actually named after Dwight D.
[61] Gross, who was the former chief engineer
[62] of Denver Water. That's the utility
[63] company that owns and operates both the
[64] reservoir and the dam. Sorry to ruin the
[65] fun, but obviously you now know. When
[66] full, the reservoir is capable of
[67] holding 42,000 acre feet, around 52
[68] million cubic m of water. And for
[69] decades that was absolutely fine
[70] until 2020 when Denver Water got
[71] permission to expand the reservoir by
[72] making the dam even bigger by over 100
[73] ft. That would see capacity increase
[74] almost threefold to 119,000 acret
[75] or nearly 150 million cub m
[76] enough to supply 72,000 homes with water
[77] every year. What that led to is
[78] a ginormous project to build a 131 ft
[79] dam raise on top of a 340 ft tall dam.
[80] >> Jeff Martin leads the team at Denver
[81] Water, responsible for the entire
[82] program from concept right through to
[83] completion.
[84] >> Building a 471 ft concrete dam
[85] in 2025 is a challenging endeavor on a
[86] number of fronts. That is big under any
[87] standards throughout the world and it's
[88] extremely rare what we're tackling
[89] really just to provide a secure water
[90] future to the Denver area. Why does it
[91] need securing? Well, because over the
[92] years Denver and neighboring Boulder
[93] County have become increasingly
[94] vulnerable to water related disasters.
[95] >> Well, a wildfire south of
[96] Boulder, Colorado this weekend forced
[97] thousands to flee. the drought picture
[98] across Colorado. The worst drought
[99] situation that we've had in
[100] several years.
[101] >> There is widespread flood activity
[102] across the area. Emergency officials
[103] are urging you to seek higher
[104] ground immediately.
[105] >> There's more than just snowy mountains
[106] in Colorado. It can get very hot, dry,
[107] and also pretty wet here, too. 2002 saw
[108] an unusually serious drought along with
[109] the Haymon fire, which destroyed well
[110] over a 100 homes. So having more water
[111] available to deal with such problems if
[112] and when they occur starts to
[113] make sense.
[114] Population growth doesn't show any signs
[115] of stopping either. In 2020, Denver
[116] Water announced that daily users had
[117] risen to 1.5 million people, 100,000
[118] higher than just 4 years before.
[119] There's a pretty big imbalance with
[120] where it stores its water as well. 90%
[121] of it is held in reservoirs to
[122] the south of Denver with the other 10%
[123] to the north where the gross dam is.
[124] But despite how it might sound,
[125] expanding this rather imposing piece of
[126] infrastructure is actually not a new
[127] idea. In fact, it was kind of the plan
[128] right from the beginning. You see, the
[129] dam was constructed with the intention
[130] of being raised at least once should
[131] that become necessary in the future,
[132] which it clearly has. So, in a minute,
[133] we're going to come on to how teams here
[134] have actually been delivering on a
[135] scheme that's designed to keep a city
[136] flowing efficiently for years to
[137] come. But before we do that, I want to
[138] talk to you about something that's
[139] designed to do the same for the
[140] businesses who build projects
[141] like this. The way these businesses
[142] operate can be very complex. And trust
[143] me, the last thing they need is more
[144] stress when it comes to payments. Sales,
[145] transactions, customers, performance,
[146] inventory. They're often done manually
[147] or using tools that are disconnected.
[148] This isn't only hard to manage, it hurts
[149] profits, which is where Sky OS comes in.
[150] It's a purpose-built operating system
[151] that brings all those processes together
[152] into one connected platform,
[153] giving you both speed and visibility.
[154] Designed for the construction industry,
[155] it gives owners control over every
[156] dollar that moves through their
[157] business. In fact, it works a
[158] little bit like a DAN, except instead of
[159] retaining water and dictating how it's
[160] used, Skyos lets you retain
[161] profits and manage costs. Real-time
[162] insights and performance dashboards show
[163] you where profits are earned and where
[164] money is lost. Product and
[165] inventory tools keep every material,
[166] tax, and discount organized, while
[167] fully managed accounts can be
[168] easily made for each client, meaning no
[169] more paper trails. And because it's
[170] automated with intelligence payment
[171] optimization, it's proven to increase
[172] profits by up to 20%.
[173] You can see how Skyos is giving billions
[174] back and rebuilding the digital
[175] foundation of the construction industry
[176] at the link below. Now, let's get back
[177] over to Colorado and see how on earth
[178] you raise a dam.
[179] The idea is obviously to add more
[180] concrete to the existing dam, but not
[181] just on top. They're having to build up
[182] the southacing or dry side as well to
[183] help maintain stability. To achieve
[184] this, 118 concrete steps are being
[185] constructed from the ground right up the
[186] top of the new dam. Each one is 4 ft
[187] high and set back 2 ft from the step
[188] underneath. Then the crest or tip goes
[189] on, followed by a control building,
[190] electronics, railing, and bridge across
[191] the spillway. Construction began in
[192] 2022, and by June 2025, workers had
[193] reached the height of the original dam,
[194] more than 7,000 ft above sea level. As
[195] for the method used to create these
[196] steps, Denver Water has chosen a
[197] different approach to the original dam's
[198] builders. There's two ways to make a
[199] concrete dam. One is with what we call
[200] conventional concrete. That's how the
[201] original dam was built. And it's
[202] basically built in 50 ft blocks all the
[203] way up. And uh just like Hoover was and
[204] some of the other iconic concrete dams
[205] uh throughout the world were done. In
[206] the 1980s, a new uh method came into
[207] existence through innovation. It's
[208] called roller compacted concrete. First,
[209] the concrete is brought in by dump
[210] truck, which well dumps the material on
[211] top of the surface. Next, it's spread by
[212] a bulldozer before being rolled and
[213] compressed by a smooth drum compactor.
[214] The concrete's made on sights, a mixture
[215] of rocks, cement, fly ash, and water.
[216] While other dams have been raised
[217] before, this is the largest one in the
[218] world to be done using RCC.
[219] because we had over 600,000 yards of
[220] conventional concrete and we're
[221] going to overlay that with over 700,000
[222] yards of new roller compacted concrete.
[223] The mix design itself,
[224] temperatures that it had to maintain
[225] during placement and how it was
[226] placed against the old dam were all
[227] extremely critical details on making
[228] sure that this dam behaves as one dam
[229] going forward. This choice of material
[230] offers lower curing temperatures,
[231] meaning it doesn't take as long to set
[232] as regular concrete. Embodied carbon is
[233] reduced as well, and it's less likely to
[234] crack. So, everything appears to be
[235] going to plan, except
[236] >> a federal district court judge has dealt
[237] an expensive setback at least, and
[238] possibly an end to the project. In April
[239] 2025, all construction on the project
[240] was put on hold following a court
[241] injunction. A US district judge ruled in
[242] favor of environmental groups who've
[243] been campaigning against this expansion
[244] for years. They include the Water Keeper
[245] Alliance, Sierra Club, and Save the
[246] Colorado.
[247] They believe the new larger reservoir
[248] will have a negative effect on the wider
[249] Colorado River water system as well as
[250] nearby residents. This project would
[251] drain more water out of the Colorado
[252] River. It's in crisis mode. Um and all
[253] the states in the southwest United
[254] States are trying to decide how to use
[255] less Colorado River water and this one
[256] would use more. The second reason is
[257] that they would it would be and it has
[258] been the biggest construction project in
[259] Boulder County history. There's about a
[260] thousand houses up and around the area.
[261] It's been an extraordinary nightmare for
[262] those people living through this 24/7
[263] construction process. Adding credence to
[264] these claims, it emerged the US Army
[265] Corps of Engineers, which supplied the
[266] permits, didn't factor in the full
[267] environmental impact when it approved
[268] the project. According to the judge,
[269] viable alternatives to this expansion
[270] were not properly addressed, which led
[271] to a somewhat unlikely win for Gary and
[272] his team in court when you consider who
[273] they were up against.
[274] It certainly was a legal victory and it
[275] certainly is a David versus Goliath
[276] phenomenon. We're a tiny organization
[277] and they're one of the biggest water
[278] providers in the Southwest United
[279] States. Um, and they do have a extremely
[280] big and high-powered law firm. We're a
[281] lean, mean river saving machine. I think
[282] the outcome of the district court really
[283] worked on our behalf.
[284] >> But it was only a temporary port. Just a
[285] month later, the judge did a U-turn
[286] after claims from Denver Water that
[287] leaving the dam unfinished could lead to
[288] serious consequences
[289] like flooding. That meant construction
[290] could continue. But there was still one
[291] pretty big issue remaining. Although
[292] they got the green light to carry out
[293] the works, permission was not given to
[294] actually fill the expanded reservoir, at
[295] least not yet. The process of filling
[296] the reservoir is expected to take around
[297] 5 years, but we still don't know when
[298] or even if that can happen.
[299] New permits would need to be signed
[300] first, but because the Army Corps of
[301] Engineers made extensive and serious
[302] errors, it's unlikely to be
[303] straightforward. So, there's a chance
[304] that all of this could be for nothing.
[305] Okay, but let's rewind a bit and dig a
[306] little deeper into what exactly it is
[307] that campaigners are unhappy about. If
[308] this dam's already been here for about
[309] 70 years, then what's wrong with just
[310] making it a bit bigger? Surely,
[311] that's better than building an entirely
[312] new dam and reservoir somewhere else.
[313] This is one of the mitigation measures
[314] that Denver Water has put in place to
[315] limit what could otherwise be a much
[316] larger impact on the local environment.
[317] By storing extra water in the reservoir,
[318] they can also direct more of it into the
[319] adjacent creek, improving fish habitats.
[320] They're also introducing new wetlands
[321] and preserving other areas to offset
[322] some of the deforestation that has to
[323] happen on a project like this. Around
[324] 200,000 trees are being removed, which
[325] is sort of inevitable when so much land
[326] is being inundated and water quality has
[327] to be maintained. There's only one way
[328] to tackle a project like this and that's
[329] with a culture of environmental
[330] stewardship and making sure that
[331] we're fully analyzing the impacts from
[332] the project. We've done a lot of
[333] different mitigation to make sure that
[334] in the end that this is a net
[335] environmental benefit
[336] to the state of Colorado.
[337] >> That might be so, but Gary isn't
[338] convinced. He believes the impact of
[339] these dams is just too great, not just
[340] on the local area, but on the whole
[341] Colorado River basin. Dams kill rivers.
[342] That's what dams do. They block
[343] a river. Uh if it's a hydropower dam,
[344] they block a river and completely
[345] changed the flow of the water in the
[346] river. The climate scientists claim
[347] drought and climate change have lowered
[348] the flow in the entire Colorado River
[349] around 20%. From its original flow and
[350] so the river has already been
[351] devastated. This will make it worse and
[352] that's why we're opposing it.
[353] >> Then there's the cost of all this. When
[354] the project gained approval in 2021, the
[355] price was set at $531 million. And that
[356] remains the most widely reported figure.
[357] But when you factor in the unexpected
[358] legal costs and the new permits that now
[359] need to be done, there's a good chance
[360] that number's going to rise. As for
[361] where that money comes from, unlike a
[362] lot of American infrastructure
[363] projects, it won't be tax dollars.
[364] Denver Water is funded entirely by rate
[365] payers, fees for connecting new
[366] customers, and the sale of renewable
[367] energy. Gross Dam has been home to its
[368] own hydro plant since 2007.
[369] Despite the problems the company's
[370] faced, their reservoir's latest upgrade
[371] isn't too far from the end. 2026 is when
[372] they plan to top out on the dam and
[373] finish the spillway and supporting
[374] buildings. A year later, it'll be time
[375] to start filling the reservoir, assuming
[376] they've been cleared to do so.
[377] Like so many other construction projects
[378] that have had some major issues, the
[379] gross reservoir expansion is becoming
[380] known more for what's gone wrong than
[381] what's gone right. But while the
[382] setbacks and environmental concerns
[383] shouldn't be overlooked, what they're
[384] trying to achieve here deserves
[385] recognition, too.
[386] Whether or not this is a good thing for
[387] Denver, Boulder County, or the whole of
[388] Colorado is clearly a contested topic.
[389] But what can't be denied is that this is
[390] a feat of construction that truly raises
[391] the bar.
[392] This video was sponsored by Sky Systems.
[393] Don't forget to go and check out
[394] how Skyos can help your business at the
[395] link below. And as always guys, if you
[396] thought this video was damn good and you
[397] want to get more from the definitive
[398] video channel for construction,
[399] make damn sure you subscribe.