[21] Now, you might be thinking, how on Earth
[22] do you build a mega project here? And
[23] it's a good question because it may be
[24] one of the most difficult places in the
[25] world to build a road like this.
[26] This is what happens when engineering is
[27] pushed to its absolute limits and what
[28] it takes to build a mega builds in one
[29] of the most isolated corners of our
[30] planet.

[44] So, why does that matter? Well, it
[45] doesn't really, except for prestige,
[46] because this means that La Nouvelle
[47] Route du Littoral, or New Coastal Road,
[48] isn't just one of the most impressive
[49] infrastructure projects being built in
[50] the Indian Ocean, it's also one of the
[51] biggest in France.

[73] the deep blue sea. Cyclones in this part
[74] of the ocean are common, battering the
[75] road with waves and winds of up to 100
[76] mph, and it's not just the road that
[77] takes a beating. The elements cause
[78] constant erosion to the cliff face,
[79] sending rocks and boulders hurtling down
[80] onto the road and road users below. On

[148] The western section of the route would
[149] once again be built on a dyke, but
[150] instead of disappearing underground, it
[151] would rise onto its defining feature,
[152] the Grand Chaloupe Viaduct. Stretching
[153] for 5.4 km and up to 300 m away from the
[154] shore, it would form the centerpiece of
[155] the 12.5 km route and once complete,
[156] would become the longest bridge in
[157] France. Okay, sounds great.

[258] With the wind you see here, we're going
[259] to have dust everywhere around, and all
[260] the people are going to be concerned,
[261] especially the children and old people
[262] and people with already a disease. Now,
[263] before your very eyes, it's important
[264] not to underestimate the environmental
[265] concerns of this project. Reunion isn't
[266] an idyllic island paradise for nothing.

[313] As well as France's longest bridge, the
[314] project had also picked up another, less
[315] welcome, record. With just eight
[316] out of 12.4 km constructed, the cost had
[317] skyrocketed to over 2 billion US
[318] dollars, making it one of the most
[319] expensive roads in the world.

[374] This video was sponsored by Ryoun
[375] Design. Don't forget that you can try
[376] Ryoun Design for free using the link
[377] below. And as always, guys, if you
[378] enjoyed this video and you want to get
[379] more from the definitive video channel
[380] for construction,
[381] make sure you subscribe to the B1M.
