[1] Dublin might be world famous, but did
[2] you know it's facing a bit of a crisis?
[3] The fair city welcomes millions
[4] of visitors every year to see its
[5] castles, cathedrals, and of course, the
[6] Guinness Storehouse.
[7] All the Americans are all over here. Oh
[8] my god, I love this. I love Ireland.
[9] They're doing my
[10] It's an area rich in history and
[11] culture.
[12] But while its attractions are a
[13] sight to behold, getting to them isn't
[14] exactly straightforward. Can anybody
[15] explain to me why the traffic is so bad?
[16] A 45-minute journey can turn into
[17] a 3-hour journey. So, you're
[18] looking at about 2 and 3 and 1/2 and 4
[19] hours on the road every day. During our
[20] peak rush hours, the average speed
[21] across the network is about 11 km an
[22] hour.
[23] >> 11 km an hour.
[24] >> 11 km an hour. If you're a fast runner,
[25] you'll actually run quicker than that.
[26] Dublin's population has grown by nearly
[27] a third since the turn of the century,
[28] but its travel infrastructure has in no
[29] way kept pace. It's now the 11th most
[30] congested city in the world, and each
[31] year it's climbing the rankings.
[32] In 2025,
[33] as a driver in Dublin, you'll have sat
[34] in traffic delays for an average of
[35] 95 mind-numbing hours across the
[36] year. In that time, you could play more
[37] than 80 Gaelic football matches or
[38] watch the entirety of Father Ted
[39] nine times through. And by the way,
[40] that's a 17% increase in delay
[41] times on 2024 and a 32% increase
[42] on 2023.
[43] Put simply, traveling around Dublin is a
[44] nightmare, and the situation's getting
[45] worse. It's actually a good point, you
[46] know what I'm trying to say? By 2040,
[47] the economic costs associated
[48] with congestion are expected to hit a
[49] whopping 1.5 billion euros
[50] every year. Ouch. The thing is, the
[51] government was supposed to be sorting
[52] this with a massive investment into
[53] infrastructure, but officials have
[54] U-turned on a policy to spend on a ratio
[55] of two to one between public transport
[56] and roads.
[57] There are desperate calls for a
[58] travel fix because the problem not only
[59] affects people personally, but it's a
[60] bit of a red flag for foreign investors.
[61] A lack of travel infrastructure
[62] isn't a great advertisement. For nearly
[63] 30 years, Ireland has teased a
[64] desperately needed metro to tackle its
[65] congestion nightmare. But, without
[66] really making any proper inroads towards
[67] building it. And with Dublin's travel
[68] problem getting worse and worse, what
[69] the hell's being done to fix this city?
[70] >>
[71] >> It's not like Ireland doesn't know that
[72] Dublin needs help with its travel horror
[73] show.
[74] At the turn of the century, the
[75] government proposed a flashy new metro
[76] as part of its Transport 21 initiative.
[77] The plan was to spend 34 billion euros
[78] modernizing Ireland's travel
[79] infrastructure. And that included an
[80] underground train line from St.
[81] Stephen's Green to Dublin Airport and
[82] then continuing to Swords. What I am
[83] confirming today is that by 2007, we
[84] will have the airport link done because
[85] that has been identified now as a
[86] government priority. You see, Dublin has
[87] fallen well behind. Beyond its
[88] congestion dilemma, if you've tried
[89] traveling to Dublin Airport, you'll be
[90] more than aware that there's no rail
[91] access whatsoever. If you saw all the
[92] cars queuing up going out the M50, we're
[93] just coming up from Galway this morning.
[94] There's there's no transport system in
[95] Ireland as far as I can see. It's
[96] actually one of the last European
[97] capitals without a direct train to its
[98] airport. You've got to take a taxi, get
[99] a lift, or jump on the bus, which seems
[100] a bit ridiculous for a city of this
[101] scale.
[102] In 2005, Metro North as it was known was
[103] formally thrown into the limelight. It
[104] was seen as way to drag Dublin into the
[105] 21st century. This thing even gained
[106] planning permission, which was a a huge
[107] moment. It kind of represented this big
[108] new dawn for the people of Dublin. But
[109] by 2011, it had become a non-starter.
[110] The Irish economy was considered one of
[111] the most stable in Europe.
[112] >> One of the most booming economies
[113] in Europe.
[114] >> It became known as the Celtic Tiger.
[115] >> Then the financial crisis hit. The
[116] Celtic Tiger is dead.
[117] >> Officially, the country is now
[118] in recession.
[119] >> What's going on in Ireland? Greed,
[120] greed, and more
[121] But the then government rubbished
[122] talk about a bailout. Is it just
[123] total fiction? It is fiction. Three days
[124] later, Central Bank said there would be
[125] a bailout. We had a stupid
[126] government with a regulator that
[127] was asleep at the wheel. And of course,
[128] above all, bankers. The
[129] taxpayers at home in Ireland who would
[130] like to have some answers. Please now.
[131] Okay, thank you very much. You're a
[132] liability because nobody
[133] believes Welfare queues are forming for
[134] the first time since the early '90s.
[135] Jeez, man. This is this is this is a
[136] joke. So, I'm sensing a a wee bit of
[137] discontent.
[138] You are indeed, sir.
[139] >>
[140] >> As the money dried up due to the global
[141] recession, Metro North slipped further
[142] and further down the priority
[143] list. Various iterations have since
[144] followed. In 2018, an updated plan
[145] offered hope that Dubliners could get
[146] around the city via an underground train
[147] line by 2027. But come 2021, with no
[148] spades in the ground, the government
[149] said the timeline was, well, just take
[150] listen to this. That was never likely to
[151] be to be achievable, I'll be honest. And
[152] the budget forecast for this is also
[153] much more than the likely final outcome.
[154] Oh, jeez.
[155] Re-
[156] >> [laughter]
[157] >> Really?
[158] And while they were right, because that
[159] would be next year, and no groundwork
[160] had started yet, why set unrealistic
[161] deadlines to begin with? Construction
[162] should then have gotten underway by
[163] 2025, but the latest metro designs
[164] didn't gain planning permission until
[165] October last year. And because of the
[166] twisting nature of Ireland's so far
[167] failed attempts to build a metro, the
[168] city's residents are somewhat skeptical
[169] it'll ever happen. I think they should
[170] get on and build the bloody thing.
[171] >> But can the government be trusted? If
[172] you were born the day that the metro was
[173] initially due to open, you'd be able to
[174] vote by the time it does actually open.
[175] Even though it could cut travel time to
[176] the city by more than half, Dubliners
[177] have been stung by promises of an
[178] underground rail line in the past. So,
[179] confidence is pretty low. Even the B1M's
[180] own Irishman and video editor
[181] extraordinaire Jim Casey is far from
[182] convinced. With all that being said, the
[183] latest plans give real reason for
[184] careful optimism. Government have
[185] committed in the the last budget 2
[186] billion euro for um uh for metro to to
[187] proceed. So, governments and the
[188] agencies that are supporting and and
[189] building building and delivering metro
[190] are proceeding as if this piece of
[191] infrastructure is going to happen. We're
[192] hiring people, the tender documents have
[193] been put together to bring consortia to
[194] the city to deliver our metro.
[195] For the second time, planning permission
[196] has been granted for a metro in Dublin.
[197] And while it's taken countless
[198] time-consuming discussions about where
[199] the route should go and how it should be
[200] constructed, that almost makes sense.
[201] This metro has been designed,
[202] redesigned, and redesigned again. And
[203] developing various iterations of the
[204] route, even if they're inevitably cast
[205] aside, is a time-consuming task. But it
[206] doesn't have to be. While I've been
[207] using RoundDesigns all-in-one CAD
[208] software to create my dream home right
[209] smack in the middle of Dublin, which by
[210] the way, guys, I only need like
[211] a trillion YouTube video views to pay
[212] for, this platform is actually the ideal
[213] workmate for any type of project,
[214] including, for example, a massive new
[215] metro line. Round Design is a fully
[216] web-based next generation tool built for
[217] designers and architects. So, say you
[218] want to design the swanky new train
[219] carriages that could run through Dublin.
[220] You can import industry standard files
[221] or create your own design from scratch.
[222] But, what if you can't find, for
[223] instance, a train seat from the
[224] thousands of thousands of CAD blocks in
[225] the pre-existing software libraries?
[226] Well, Round Design has an AI tool that
[227] can vectorize your images. As an
[228] example, my train carriage features a
[229] corner sofa and a squat rack. And
[230] because it's all in one, I can design,
[231] edit, document, and then present my
[232] proposal without having to faff around
[233] switching tools. Just imagine, no more
[234] wasting time transferring files between
[235] multiple different softwares. Whether
[236] you're an urban planner designing the
[237] next great metro line, or like me, you
[238] just want to draw up a swanky Irish
[239] penthouse, you can try Round Design for
[240] free using the link in the description
[241] or by scanning the QR code on screen
[242] now. Now, let's get back to Dublin's
[243] metro because it looks like they might
[244] actually be getting somewhere.
[245] >>
[246] >> Given this is the country's first ever
[247] metro, authorities are obviously keen to
[248] get it right. Spending billions on a
[249] project like this and then getting the
[250] route wrong would be disastrous,
[251] especially when it's already taken quite
[252] a lot of time and has already been a bit
[253] of a debacle.
[254] Honestly, I think people just want the
[255] government and the authorities to get on
[256] with it and deliver it and stop talking
[257] about it. When it was announced the last
[258] time, there was a a researcher in
[259] zoology that basically said, "The time
[260] that we've been talking about the metro
[261] and to construct a metro, a snail could
[262] have gone from Dublin city center, I
[263] passed the airport, and do the whole
[264] line based upon how long it's taken us
[265] to get to where we are right now." So, I
[266] think right now, the money is there, the
[267] ambition is there, the support is there.
[268] So, if not now, when? After waiting so
[269] long already, it probably feels like
[270] this merry-go-round could continue
[271] forever. But, ask Torontonians who
[272] waited nearly 20 years for work to start
[273] on Eglinton Crosstown or the city of
[274] Thessaloniki which waited a century for
[275] its metro and you'll realize that these
[276] projects can take an absolute age to
[277] happen and then all of a sudden the city
[278] turns into a work site.
[279] And with that said the bidding process
[280] for contracts to build Dublin MetroLink
[281] has actually started.
[282] The plan is to link the north and south
[283] of Dublin connecting the airport with
[284] each end of the city via 16 stations.
[285] Inevitably as with all good things it's
[286] not going to come cheap. The line will
[287] stretch nearly 19 kilometers from
[288] Charlemont passing through three
[289] different universities schools hospitals
[290] going all the way up to Swords in North
[291] County Dublin one of the fastest growing
[292] areas in all of Ireland. And all of that
[293] will come with a whopping price tag of
[294] 9.5 billion euros. For context that's
[295] around 500 million euros per kilometer.
[296] While cited as unlikely the Department
[297] for Transport said the project could
[298] reach a staggering 23 billion euros.
[299] That would give it a cost per kilometer
[300] similar to that of New York's Second
[301] Avenue Subway. Dublin MetroLink could
[302] become one of the most expensive
[303] underground train lines of all time.
[304] So the big question is why? Why is
[305] Ireland's first metro so expensive
[306] especially when you consider that an
[307] early iteration of the plan came with an
[308] estimate of just three billion
[309] euros. Well inflation certainly plays a
[310] part but a lot of the cost comes with
[311] the construction methodology. Early
[312] designs called for Dublin's metro to be
[313] largely delivered using cut and cover
[314] which is kind of the ideal. You excavate
[315] from the surface down to your desired
[316] depth construct your structure and then
[317] backfill on top of it. Cut and cover is
[318] pretty cost effective and less intense
[319] than trudging deep underground. You're
[320] not having to dig too far down, which
[321] means no serious engineering at depths.
[322] And perhaps most importantly, you
[323] haven't got to buy or hire one of these.
[324] If you spent any more than 5 minutes
[325] watching one of our videos, then you're
[326] probably going to recognize TBMs or
[327] tunnel boring machines. They dig deep
[328] below the surface, carving through rock
[329] and soil to create, well, tunnels, and
[330] they're far from boring. It's a whole
[331] lot more expensive than the alternative.
[332] Nevertheless, the latest schematics make
[333] regular use of them. You see,
[334] cut and cover is incredibly disruptive.
[335] Roads have to be closed or converted to
[336] one way for weeks and even months on
[337] end. One of the appeals of Dublin is
[338] those picturesque narrow streets. But in
[339] the 11th most congested city on the
[340] planet, more chaos than necessary is
[341] just asking for trouble. In short,
[342] tunnel boring limits the chaos, which is
[343] crucial when you're working in a dense
[344] city like this. And actually, the plan's
[345] been changed a bit. So, the trains are
[346] now going to travel through one single
[347] bore tunnel rather than the originally
[348] planned twin bore system. And
[349] the idea of that is to cut down on work
[350] and ultimately some cost. Cut and
[351] cover's going to be limited to specific
[352] shallow sections and surface stations
[353] along the route. For instance, at
[354] O'Connell Street and St. Stephen's
[355] Green. Deep station boxes, basically
[356] like a large shell underground to house
[357] the station structure, are going to be
[358] dug into the earth near heritage sites.
[359] Tunneling has got to be minimized to
[360] protect the foundations of those
[361] buildings. Now, tunnels along the route
[362] are going to be 9.5 m in diameter and
[363] reach depths of up to 30 m. And
[364] throughout the process, settlement and
[365] vibration are going to be monitored to
[366] make sure the ground remains stable.
[367] >>
[368] >> Now, all of that work is necessary to
[369] build a much-needed piece of
[370] infrastructure. And for construction
[371] fans like myself, it's a pretty cool
[372] project to be able to watch, follow, and
[373] check in on. But, the process is
[374] incredibly disruptive. The tunneling,
[375] the rerouting of existing travel
[376] options, the noise, the dust, the list
[377] goes on. I guess what I'm trying to say
[378] is that the Dublin MetroLink is going to
[379] make things a whole lot worse before it
[380] makes them any better.
[381] This metro line is going through the
[382] heart of the city, driving under and
[383] through urban areas and residential
[384] spaces. And beyond some necessary but
[385] congestion-causing road closures, some
[386] of the tunneling work is set to be
[387] carried out around the clock. As a TBM
[388] approaches an area, there'll be about 3
[389] weeks worth of noise, and then another 3
[390] weeks worth of noise as it leaves again.
[391] That's 6 weeks of unavoidable
[392] construction noise. And in truth, TBMs
[393] aren't exactly subtle. You've got to
[394] remember that these tunnels are being
[395] dug directly beneath workplaces, public
[396] parks, and people's homes. So, what
[397] about escaping to a local park for some
[398] peace and quiet? Well, not so fast. 20%
[399] of the city's most popular green space,
[400] St. Stephen's Green, is going to be
[401] closed during construction. And Albert
[402] College Park, 15 minutes from the city
[403] center, flush with trees, green space,
[404] and a playground, is going to be the
[405] center of a mandatory intervention
[406] shaft. You see, tunnels have to offer
[407] escape routes and ventilation at pretty
[408] regular points along the route. For
[409] instance, if you had a 3,000-m long
[410] tunnel and a fire broke out, emergency
[411] services would have a serious battle to
[412] reach commuters who'd be suffering with
[413] very little fresh air. The EU calls for
[414] these intervals to be less than 1,000 m
[415] apart. And therein lies the problem. The
[416] section of track that runs underneath
[417] the area between Collins Avenue and
[418] Griffith Park is nearly 1,500 m. I.E.,
[419] it gets a big shake of the head from the
[420] EU, and that's why an intervention shaft
[421] has to be created no more than a
[422] kilometer from either of these stations.
[423] Albert College Park is the destination
[424] of choice, but while Dubliners are
[425] battling congested roads and closed-off
[426] parks, I'm afraid the travel problem is
[427] going to stretch even further. The irony
[428] of building a new train line is that
[429] it's going to temporarily close some of
[430] the existing above-ground routes.
[431] Commuters are going to have to find
[432] other ways to travel, whether that's on
[433] redirected trains, on buses, or take a
[434] deep breath, by getting back into their
[435] cars. Sections of the Western Commuter
[436] Line are going to be shut for nearly 2
[437] years, and the Southwestern Commuter
[438] Line is going to face closures for up to
[439] 5 months, which is not going to be
[440] pretty. Now, this isn't some
[441] agenda against Ireland's approach to
[442] construction. If any dense city anywhere
[443] in the world were to start building open
[444] tunnels in the streets or constructing
[445] new stations in the middle of its urban
[446] center, there would, of course, be a
[447] space issue. And it's not like large
[448] sections of Dublin can be closed down
[449] for this work to take place. This
[450] project has got to coexist around
[451] everyday life in this city. But, given
[452] how most of these metro builds go around
[453] the world, and the fact that Ireland is
[454] going to be doing this for the first
[455] time, don't be surprised if the fair
[456] city is a work site for quite a while.
[457] Although, that absolutely doesn't mean
[458] that this thing should be shelved yet
[459] again. These projects are critical
[460] pieces of infrastructure um for our
[461] country, and not being able to deliver
[462] them is crippling. Crippling our cities,
[463] crippling our infrastructure, crippling
[464] our ability to be able to deliver the
[465] housing and transport, and meet our
[466] climate goals. Hopefully, on this one,
[467] uh common sense will prevail, and and
[468] the project will go ahead, because it
[469] will have such a fundamental impact upon
[470] our city. But, to see the benefits of
[471] the line, construction work actually
[472] needs to begin. The Minister for
[473] Transportation, Dara O'Brien, previously
[474] said that the aim is to break ground in
[475] 2027. So, fingers crossed. If
[476] you're watching this in 2027 or later,
[477] and it still hasn't started, then we're
[478] really sorry to hear that. Beyond the
[479] obvious benefits Dublin MetroLink should
[480] have on easing congestion here, the line
[481] has also got to stack up financially. We
[482] know it's going to cost a pretty penny,
[483] but early estimates in 2022 from the
[484] Department of Transport suggested that
[485] the Irish economy would receive about
[486] 13.7 billion euros over a 60-year period
[487] due to the Metro's existence. What that
[488] means, if the project somehow skyrockets
[489] to that unlikely 23 billion euro
[490] construction mark, well, let's just hope
[491] that doesn't happen. It's not going to
[492] be a comfortable journey. Building this
[493] routes will undoubtedly cause more than
[494] a few headaches. While a healthy dose of
[495] skepticism remains among Dubliners, it
[496] does seem to finally be happening. This
[497] city's waited patiently for an answer to
[498] its travel woes for nearly 30 years, and
[499] it looks like it might finally be about
[500] to get it.
[501] This video was sponsored by Rayon
[502] Design. Don't forget that if you're a
[503] professional interior designer or an
[504] architect, you're going to want to check
[505] out Rayon Design by yourself for free at
[506] the link in the description. And as
[507] always, guys, if you enjoyed this video
[508] and you want to get more from the
[509] definitive video channel for
[510] construction, make sure you subscribe to
[511] the B1M.