[62] isn't a great advertisement. For nearly
[63] 30 years, Ireland has teased a
[64] desperately needed metro to tackle its
[65] congestion nightmare. But, without
[66] really making any proper inroads towards
[67] building it. And with Dublin's travel
[68] problem getting worse and worse, what
[69] the hell's being done to fix this city?
[70] >>
[71] >> It's not like Ireland doesn't know that
[72] Dublin needs help with its travel horror
[73] show.

[95] Ireland as far as I can see. It's
[96] actually one of the last European
[97] capitals without a direct train to its
[98] airport. You've got to take a taxi, get
[99] a lift, or jump on the bus, which seems
[100] a bit ridiculous for a city of this
[101] scale.

[135] Jeez, man. This is this is this is a
[136] joke. So, I'm sensing a a wee bit of
[137] discontent.

[139] >>
[140] >> As the money dried up due to the global
[141] recession, Metro North slipped further
[142] and further down the priority
[143] list. Various iterations have since
[144] followed. In 2018, an updated plan
[145] offered hope that Dubliners could get
[146] around the city via an underground train
[147] line by 2027. But come 2021, with no

[158] And while they were right, because that
[159] would be next year, and no groundwork
[160] had started yet, why set unrealistic
[161] deadlines to begin with? Construction
[162] should then have gotten underway by
[163] 2025, but the latest metro designs
[164] didn't gain planning permission until
[165] October last year. And because of the

[187] proceed. So, governments and the
[188] agencies that are supporting and and
[189] building building and delivering metro
[190] are proceeding as if this piece of
[191] infrastructure is going to happen. We're
[192] hiring people, the tender documents have
[193] been put together to bring consortia to
[194] the city to deliver our metro.

[206] doesn't have to be. While I've been
[207] using RoundDesigns all-in-one CAD
[208] software to create my dream home right
[209] smack in the middle of Dublin, which by
[210] the way, guys, I only need like
[211] a trillion YouTube video views to pay
[212] for, this platform is actually the ideal
[213] workmate for any type of project,
[214] including, for example, a massive new
[215] metro line. Round Design is a fully

[235] multiple different softwares. Whether
[236] you're an urban planner designing the
[237] next great metro line, or like me, you
[238] just want to draw up a swanky Irish
[239] penthouse, you can try Round Design for
[240] free using the link in the description
[241] or by scanning the QR code on screen
[242] now. Now, let's get back to Dublin's

[245] >>
[246] >> Given this is the country's first ever
[247] metro, authorities are obviously keen to
[248] get it right. Spending billions on a
[249] project like this and then getting the
[250] route wrong would be disastrous,
[251] especially when it's already taken quite
[252] a lot of time and has already been a bit
[253] of a debacle.

[257] about it. When it was announced the last
[258] time, there was a a researcher in
[259] zoology that basically said, "The time
[260] that we've been talking about the metro
[261] and to construct a metro, a snail could
[262] have gone from Dublin city center, I
[263] passed the airport, and do the whole
[264] line based upon how long it's taken us
[265] to get to where we are right now." So, I
[266] think right now, the money is there, the
[267] ambition is there, the support is there.

[271] forever. But, ask Torontonians who
[272] waited nearly 20 years for work to start
[273] on Eglinton Crosstown or the city of
[274] Thessaloniki which waited a century for
[275] its metro and you'll realize that these
[276] projects can take an absolute age to
[277] happen and then all of a sudden the city
[278] turns into a work site.

[335] Roads have to be closed or converted to
[336] one way for weeks and even months on
[337] end. One of the appeals of Dublin is
[338] those picturesque narrow streets. But in
[339] the 11th most congested city on the
[340] planet, more chaos than necessary is
[341] just asking for trouble. In short,

[367] >>
[368] >> Now, all of that work is necessary to
[369] build a much-needed piece of
[370] infrastructure. And for construction
[371] fans like myself, it's a pretty cool
[372] project to be able to watch, follow, and
[373] check in on. But, the process is
[374] incredibly disruptive. The tunneling,
[375] the rerouting of existing travel
[376] options, the noise, the dust, the list
[377] goes on. I guess what I'm trying to say

[415] apart. And therein lies the problem. The
[416] section of track that runs underneath
[417] the area between Collins Avenue and
[418] Griffith Park is nearly 1,500 m. I.E.,
[419] it gets a big shake of the head from the
[420] EU, and that's why an intervention shaft
[421] has to be created no more than a
[422] kilometer from either of these stations.

[440] pretty. Now, this isn't some
[441] agenda against Ireland's approach to
[442] construction. If any dense city anywhere
[443] in the world were to start building open
[444] tunnels in the streets or constructing
[445] new stations in the middle of its urban
[446] center, there would, of course, be a
[447] space issue. And it's not like large

[449] for this work to take place. This
[450] project has got to coexist around
[451] everyday life in this city. But, given
[452] how most of these metro builds go around
[453] the world, and the fact that Ireland is
[454] going to be doing this for the first
[455] time, don't be surprised if the fair
[456] city is a work site for quite a while.

[459] again. These projects are critical
[460] pieces of infrastructure um for our
[461] country, and not being able to deliver
[462] them is crippling. Crippling our cities,
[463] crippling our infrastructure, crippling
[464] our ability to be able to deliver the
[465] housing and transport, and meet our
[466] climate goals. Hopefully, on this one,
