[19] By 2040, the economic costs associated with congestion are expected to hit a whopping 1.5 billion euros every year. Ouch.
[21] There are desperate calls for a travel fix because the problem not only affects people personally, but it's a bit of a red flag for foreign investors.
[27] At the turn of the century, the government proposed a flashy new metro as part of its Transport 21 initiative.
[28] The plan was to spend 34 billion euros modernizing Ireland's travel infrastructure. And that included an underground train line from St. Stephen's Green to Dublin Airport and then continuing to Swords.
[61] In 2018, an updated plan offered hope that Dubliners could get around the city via an underground train line by 2027.
[83] While I've been using RoundDesigns all-in-one CAD software to create my dream home right smack in the middle of Dublin, which by the way, guys, I only need like a trillion YouTube video views to pay
[84] for, this platform is actually the ideal workmate for any type of project, including, for example, a massive new metro line.
[86] So, say you want to design the swanky new train carriages that could run through Dublin.
[88] But, what if you can't find, for instance, a train seat from the thousands of thousands of CAD blocks in the pre-existing software libraries?
[91] And because it's all in one, I can design, edit, document, and then present my proposal without having to faff around switching tools.
[94] you can try Round Design for free using the link in the description or by scanning the QR code on screen now.
[124] They dig deep below the surface, carving through rock and soil to create, well, tunnels, and they're far from boring.
[158] The irony of building a new train line is that it's going to temporarily close some of the existing above-ground routes.
[166] don't be surprised if the fair city is a work site for quite a while.