[1] Take a look at these two buildings. Now,
[2] which is taller? If you guess the one on
[3] the right, you'd be wrong. Okay, how
[4] about an easier one? These two. Any
[5] guesses? It is, of course, the Lotwell
[6] Tower. Although, if we took it to the
[7] usable height, then it would be this
[8] one. Confused? You should be. You see,
[9] the world's tallest buildings aren't all
[10] they seem. Because for decades now,
[11] architects have been using a very clever
[12] set of tricks to juice the heights of
[13] the world's tallest buildings. And as
[14] the next tallest building on our planet
[15] marks the construction of its 100th
[16] floor, it got us thinking, how big will
[17] it actually be? So, we've picked six
[18] skyscrapers that really stretch the
[19] rules of height to find out what tallest
[20] building actually means.
[21] First off, here's one for all you
[22] millennials out there. The Patronis
[23] Towers. They're a bit of a forgotten
[24] giant nowadays, but man, what a
[25] nostalgia trip. Shan Connory and
[26] Katherine Zeta Jones used them as a
[27] jungle gym. They were in video games and
[28] they even got dropped on London in a
[29] completely unnecessary sequel to
[30] Independence Day.
[31] >> They like to get the landmarks.
[32] >> But more than any of that, the Patronis
[33] Towers were the world's tallest building
[34] from 1998 to 2004. It was a huge moment
[35] of pride for the people of Malaysia. But
[36] not everyone was so happy. You see, the
[37] building it relegated into second place
[38] was this, the Willis Tower, or the Sears
[39] Tower as it was called back then. It had
[40] held the top spot since 1974, and
[41] Chicagoans were feeling a bit robbed
[42] because
[43] see the problem.
[44] >> Now, you might think the height is
[45] measured to the top of the antenna here,
[46] or at least the top of the roof here.
[47] Either way, the Willis Tower wins,
[48] right? Wrong. So wrong, in fact, that in
[49] 1996, as the Patronus Towers were
[50] nearing completion, a delegation of
[51] incensed Chicago journalists demanded an
[52] answer. So they went to the keepers of
[53] the official list of tallest buildings,
[54] the Council on Tall Buildings and Urban
[55] Habitat, now renamed to the Council on
[56] Vertical Urbanism.
[57] >> Strangers from distant lands, friends of
[58] old.
[59] >> Yeah, exactly that sort of thing.
[60] Anyway, despite all the protests, the
[61] council was perfectly clear. Buildings
[62] are and always have been measured from
[63] the street level up to the architectural
[64] top of the building. These antennas on
[65] top of the Willis Tower have nothing to
[66] do with the architecture or the
[67] structure of the building. They're TV
[68] masts that were added on after it was
[69] built, and they were never included in
[70] its height. These spires on top of the
[71] patronis tower on the other hand don't
[72] serve a function but they are a
[73] deliberate architectural feature of the
[74] building and as such they take the
[75] overall height to 451.9
[76] m.
[77] Great news for anyone who and I'm just
[78] spitboarding here wanted to buy a
[79] penthouse in the tallest building on
[80] earth. A penthouse that could look like
[81] this. A few chairs over here. Guest
[82] bedroom. Onsuite bathroom. Yeah, that'll
[83] do. Oh, sorry. I should say this isn't
[84] the actual penthouse. It's just one I've
[85] designed myself using Rayon Design. For
[86] all you architects and interior
[87] designers out there, Rayon Design is the
[88] next generation CAD platform that's been
[89] designed to fit the way you want to work
[90] in 2026. It's fully web- based, so your
[91] entire team can work off the same model
[92] in real time. If I need a CAD block of a
[93] desk, for example, I can just search
[94] their library of 50,000 blocks and place
[95] it in my design in seconds. And if it's
[96] not quite right, I can create my own in
[97] no time at all, thanks to Rayon's AI
[98] feature. I've used Rayon Design to
[99] create a fancy penthouse, but you can
[100] use it for any kind of commercial or
[101] residential project. I seriously rate
[102] Rayon because it does everything you
[103] need in one unified platform. precise
[104] technical drawings, stylized client
[105] presentations, even procurement, all
[106] stay synchronized through its single
[107] source of truth model. But don't just
[108] take my word for it. If you want to step
[109] up your workflow and help us to continue
[110] to make these awesome videos, then click
[111] the link below or scan the QR code on
[112] screen to try out Round Design for
[113] yourself for free today.
[114] Now, rules are rules, but the whole
[115] episode caused such a stink that the
[116] council introduced two additional sets
[117] of criteria for measuring the height of
[118] skyscrapers. The coveted tallest
[119] building award would still go to the one
[120] with the highest architectural height,
[121] but a record would also be kept of the
[122] highest occupied floor and the highest
[123] point of anything connected to the
[124] building. But instead of settling the
[125] matter, that was just the start. In at
[126] number two is Medca 118. Just a stones
[127] throw across Koala Lumpa from the
[128] Petronis Towers. When it completed in
[129] 2024, it entered the rankings as the
[130] world's second tallest building, nudging
[131] China's Shanghai Tower down to third.
[132] And Chinese commentators were
[133] surprisingly fine with that.
[134] >> I'm kidding. They were absolutely
[135] furious.
[136] >> Okay, here we go again. This is Medca
[137] 118. And this is the Shanghai Tower.
[138] Thanks to that spire, Medca tops out at
[139] a neat 678.9
[140] m, blasting past the Shanghai Tower.
[141] Surely this is really pushing it. The
[142] highest floor in Medca is here, just
[143] above 500 m up. The Shanghai Tower has a
[144] restaurant on floor 120, over 50 m
[145] higher. If the two were next to each
[146] other, you could literally have lunch in
[147] the Shanghai Tower and look down on the
[148] roof of Medca 118. And yet, that
[149] building would be taller. Well, as
[150] strange as it sounds, the same rules
[151] apply. Medca's spire is architecturally
[152] integral to the building. But we do
[153] actually have a term for things like
[154] this,
[155] vanity height. Measure from the highest
[156] occupiable floor to the architectural
[157] peak of the building and you have its
[158] vanity height. Vanity height can come in
[159] all shapes and sizes. And today almost
[160] no skyscraper would be seen without one,
[161] including the Shanghai Tower, whose
[162] architectural tip sits 48 m above its
[163] highest usable floor. Although that's
[164] nothing compared to Medca, which has a
[165] whopping 176 m of vanity height. Now
[166] there are a lot of reasons why a
[167] building might have some vality heights
[168] and medas is very particular. That
[169] unusual position of the spire refers to
[170] the iconic silhouettes of the country's
[171] founder as he declared independence or
[172] meda back in 1957.
[173] Vanity Heights isn't the most flattering
[174] name and you might well see it as a way
[175] of cheating the height of a building.
[176] But Medca's advocates would think the
[177] opposite. they'd see it as completely
[178] legitimate and as a way of marking a
[179] really foundational moment in their
[180] nation's history. Now, regardless of
[181] what you might think of that, what is
[182] clear is that we're in a completely
[183] different ballgame to the Petronis
[184] Towers and their 46 m spires. That's
[185] down to a bigger shift in what
[186] skyscrapers are for. But to get to the
[187] bottom of that, we need to head to
[188] Dubai, home to the world's vainest
[189] building, the Burj Khalifa.
[190] Fun fact, that also got dropped onto
[191] London in Independence Day, too.
[192] They like to get the lands.
[193] >> Now, there's no doubt that by any
[194] measure, this is the tallest building on
[195] the planet. It comfortably wins the
[196] triple crown for architectural heights,
[197] height, tip, and highest occupiable
[198] floor. And with a gap of 242 m between
[199] this mechanical floor and the tip of the
[200] spire, the Burj Khalifa holds the record
[201] for the biggest vanity heights of any
[202] building on Earth. In fact, if you took
[203] just this part of the building and
[204] planted it in Manhattan, it would still
[205] dominate the New York skyline.
[206] But that really kind of misses the point
[207] because skyscrapers have become so much
[208] more than buildings. The first
[209] skyscrapers were born out of necessity,
[210] rising in crowded cities where buildings
[211] invariably had to make the most of the
[212] small plots of land they usually found
[213] themselves rising on. But if we rewind
[214] to the 2000s when the Burj Cleer was
[215] being built, Dubai wasn't yet a bustling
[216] metropolis. There was no land scarcity.
[217] This was a quiet, sparssely populated
[218] port with an overdependence on natural
[219] resources. It didn't start building
[220] skyscrapers because of a lack of land.
[221] it started building them to become a big
[222] thriving metropolis where nowadays
[223] skyscrapers make a lot more sense. As
[224] the 2000s rolled on, the bigger and
[225] flashier the city could build, the
[226] better. Following the lead of this
[227] enormous tower, it was a watershed
[228] moment, not just for Dubai, but for
[229] skyscrapers in and of themselves. This
[230] chart shows the amount and size of
[231] Vanity heights on super tall
[232] skyscrapers. Here are the Petronis
[233] Towers and here is what happened after
[234] that.
[235] But most importantly of all these
[236] buildings, these are the ones in Dubai.
[237] What Dubai did was leverage the allure
[238] of skyscrapers to an extent that no one
[239] had ever really done before. And leading
[240] all that was the Burj Khalifa. Yes, it
[241] was excessive. Yes, it's quite vain, but
[242] it worked. Skyscrapers aren't always
[243] just office space. They can sometimes
[244] become symbols of soft power too and in
[245] this case help reinvent an entire
[246] country. It created a world of
[247] appearances where every meter mattered
[248] and skyscrapers would never be the same
[249] again. Now to be fair, Dubai is also
[250] home to this, the Index. It's a super
[251] tall. It's in Dubai. And with just four
[252] meters separating its top floor with the
[253] building's peak, it also holds the
[254] record for the smallest vanity height of
[255] any skyscraper above 300 m, measuring
[256] just 1% of its overall structure. Now,
[257] does that contradict everything we've
[258] just said? Possibly. Yes. No. I Who
[259] knows? That is one for the comment
[260] section. The explosion in Vanity Heights
[261] might be a recent phenomenon, but the
[262] battle to build big has never been a
[263] fair fight. That brings us to number
[264] four, the Chrysler building.
[265] There's just something about skyscrapers
[266] and disaster movies, isn't there?
[267] Anyway, forget Dubai for now. Wind back
[268] a 100red years and the original race for
[269] the skies was steaming ahead in
[270] Manhattan after the island seemed to
[271] have found an infinite money hack.
[272] competition to hold the prize of the
[273] world's tallest skyscraper was intense.
[274] And in 1929, the one to beat was this,
[275] the Woolworth building. Walter Krysler
[276] was busy working on a soaring 65story
[277] art deco sky palace that would stand
[278] taller than any of its neighbors. That
[279] was until George L. Or entered the chat.
[280] Shortly after ground broke on the Kryser
[281] building, Orstrom come up with a plan
[282] for a shorter 47story building. a few
[283] miles away at 40 Wall Street. Then he
[284] quickly came to his senses and fired the
[285] starting pistol on one of the most
[286] infamous rivalries in skyscraper
[287] history. Orstramm jacked up the size of
[288] his tower, beating the Krysler building
[289] by 9.8 m. With construction already well
[290] underway, the Krysler building was
[291] redesigned to be 282 m high, which
[292] prompted Austramm to raise his tower to
[293] 283
[294] m. I know, right? It looked like 40 Wall
[295] Street had the edge, but Krysler had a
[296] trick up his sleeve. His architect,
[297] William Van Allen, quietly gained
[298] permission to plant a 38 m spire on top
[299] of the Chrysler building. To complete
[300] the subtifuge, the spire was built in
[301] secret inside the roof. And over the
[302] course of a dramatic night in October
[303] 1929, the spire was lifted up and
[304] installed on top of the new Chrysler
[305] building. The final height was taken to
[306] a massive 319 m, dwarfing the puny 40
[307] Wall Street. Walter Krysler had built
[308] the world's tallest building. But more
[309] importantly, he had won.
[310] But it wasn't just Orm who was looking
[311] at Manhattan's skyline with envy.
[312] In the 1920s, Joseph Stalin was taking
[313] an interest in remodeling Moscow, and he
[314] was determined to build something every
[315] bit as tall and grand as Uncle Sam had
[316] to brag about over in the US. And that
[317] determination has given us the number
[318] five on this list, the Ukraine Hotel in
[319] Moscow.
[320] The Burj Khalifa might have the biggest
[321] overall vanity height, but this Soviet
[322] gym holds the record that nearly stops
[323] it from being a building at all. Let me
[324] explain. The Ukraine Hotel was one of
[325] several skyscrapers in Moscow
[326] commissioned by Stalin, known today as
[327] the Seven Sisters. But if you look at
[328] the footprints, it's very different from
[329] what you'd expect from a skyscraper.
[330] Rather than being a solid block, it
[331] curves around in a U-shape with a
[332] courtyard in the center. Clearly, they
[333] weren't hardressed for space. Legend has
[334] it the hotel was originally designed
[335] with a flat roof. But Stalin wasn't
[336] happy with this. American skyscrapers
[337] have spires, he complained. So should.
[338] So in keeping with the proportions of
[339] the hotel, a gigantic 73 m spire was
[340] added on top. Now the Council on
[341] Vertical Urbanism has very strict rules
[342] on skyscrapers. At least 50% of their
[343] height must be occupiable. Otherwise,
[344] it's not a building or a skyscraper.
[345] It's a tower. That massive spire and the
[346] pedestal it sits on gives the tower a
[347] whopping vanity height that takes up 42%
[348] of the building. Not only does that make
[349] the Ukraine Hotel the Venus building by
[350] percentage of overall height, it also
[351] leaves it a hammer and sickle away from
[352] not being a building at all. Still, if
[353] you're an architect and your client is
[354] Joseph Stalin, it's best to do what he
[355] says.
[356] And that brings us back, of course, to
[357] this, the Jedi Tower. As we saw in New
[358] York, nothing drives heights like
[359] competition. It's probably no
[360] coincidence then that preliminary work
[361] for the Jedha Tower began in 2008, just
[362] before the neighboring Burj Khalifa
[363] opened for business. While the Burj
[364] Khalifa would go on to stand 828 m above
[365] the streets of Dubai, the original plans
[366] for the Jedha Tower were for a 1mile
[367] skyscraper standing 1,600 m tall. That
[368] was quickly dropped because it's
[369] absolutely insane. So, they switched
[370] metric for Imperial and started work on
[371] a 1 km tall skyscraper instead.
[372] The building is designed around a
[373] Y-shaped core. That's the same thing
[374] you'll see inside the Burj Khalifa and
[375] other structures like the CN Tower. It's
[376] used because it's the most effective way
[377] for the building to cope with the
[378] extreme weight of itself and the
[379] extraordinary lateral loads created by
[380] the wind hitting the building's
[381] exterior. But that only takes it so far.
[382] From level 167 onwards, the building
[383] shuns its concrete core and is being
[384] completed in steel. This gigantic
[385] structure will contain the ladders that
[386] allow maintenance crews to access the
[387] aircraft warning beacons at the very top
[388] of the skyscraper, the equivalent of 240
[389] stories above the Earth. Climbing that
[390] ladder won't be an easy job. Exact
[391] measurements haven't been published, but
[392] based on the standard floor height, the
[393] spire of the Jedha Tower could be well
[394] over 300 m tall. The vanity height for
[395] this extraordinary building might end up
[396] being a super tall skyscraper in its own
[397] right.
[398] Now, I'm not here to tell you what to
[399] think about vanity height or to decide
[400] whether it's right or wrong. You might
[401] think it's a good thing. You might think
[402] it's a terrible thing. I guess what I
[403] find more interesting is what it says
[404] about us and how we build our buildings
[405] because we've always done this right
[406] through the ages. From cathedrals,
[407] temples, pyramids, all the way up to the
[408] more modern skyscrapers we see today,
[409] we've always wanted to break that
[410] frontier. As human beings, we've wanted
[411] to go further and higher. Whether that's
[412] out of ego, economic gain, or wanting to
[413] be remembered long after we're gone,
[414] we've always consistently, right through
[415] time, looked up to the skies and asked,
[416] "How high can we really go?"
[417] This video was sponsored by Rayon
[418] Design. Don't forget that you can try
[419] Rayon Design for free using the link
[420] below. And as always guys, if you
[421] enjoyed this video and you want to get
[422] more from the definitive video channel
[423] for construction, make sure you're
[424] subscribed to the B1M.