[7] Although, if we took it to the usable height, then it would be this one. Confused? You should be.
[10] And as the next tallest building on our planet marks the construction of its 100th floor, it got us thinking, how big will it actually be?
[18] >> But more than any of that, the Patronis Towers were the world's tallest building from 1998 to 2004.
[40] For all you architects and interior designers out there, Rayon Design is the next generation CAD platform that's been designed to fit the way you want to work in 2026.
[43] And if it's not quite right, I can create my own in no time at all, thanks to Rayon's AI feature.
[72] Although that's nothing compared to Medca, which has a whopping 176 m of vanity height.
[124] With construction already well underway, the Krysler building was redesigned to be 282 m high, which prompted Austramm to raise his tower to 283 m. I know, right?
[133] In the 1920s, Joseph Stalin was taking an interest in remodeling Moscow, and he was determined to build something every bit as tall and grand as Uncle Sam had to brag about over in the US.
[150] Not only does that make the Ukraine Hotel the Venus building by percentage of overall height, it also leaves it a hammer and sickle away from not being a building at all.
[155] While the Burj Khalifa would go on to stand 828 m above the streets of Dubai, the original plans for the Jedha Tower were for a 1mile skyscraper standing 1,600 m tall.
[159] That's the same thing you'll see inside the Burj Khalifa and other structures like the CN Tower.
[160] It's used because it's the most effective way for the building to cope with the extreme weight of itself and the extraordinary lateral loads created by the wind hitting the building's exterior. But that only takes it so far.
[162] This gigantic structure will contain the ladders that allow maintenance crews to access the aircraft warning beacons at the very top of the skyscraper, the equivalent of 240 stories above the Earth.
[165] The vanity height for this extraordinary building might end up being a super tall skyscraper in its own right.
[169] I guess what I find more interesting is what it says about us and how we build our buildings because we've always done this right through the ages.
[172] Whether that's out of ego, economic gain, or wanting to be remembered long after we're gone, we've always consistently, right through time, looked up to the skies and asked, "How high can we really go?"