[1] I'm currently standing in a massive
[2] tunnel deep beneath the Alps.
[3] When it's finished, this incredible feat
[4] of construction is going to stretch more
[5] than 50 km and bring two major European
[6] countries closer together.
[7] It's because the tunnel forms the main
[8] section of a new railway that
[9] will literally cut journey times between
[10] these two places in half. In a few years
[11] from now, it'll become the longest
[12] single rail tunnel
[13] >>
[14] >> in the world.
[15] But how exactly do you build a train
[16] line through a mountain range?
[17] >>
[18] >> I've come to one of the world's biggest
[19] construction projects to see how teams
[20] are pulling it off.
[21] We're digging through the middle of a
[22] mountain.
[23] >>
[24] >> And to discover the incredible impact
[25] it's going to have, not just for the
[26] countries on either side,
[27] but for this wider continent, too.
[28] Woah!
[29] Look at this.
[30] >>
[31] >> This is quite literally my deepest dive
[32] yet. It's one of this planet's biggest
[33] mega builds.
[34] >>
[35] >> So, I'm currently on a little road trip
[36] between France and Italy. I'm driving
[37] from Lyon, which is back there behind
[38] me. You can see it here on the map. And
[39] we're going to be going along this road
[40] all the way here to Turin in Italy. Now,
[41] that road is the quickest and easiest
[42] way currently to get between these two
[43] places.
[44] But it's not straightforward, because
[45] what you can't see on this map is that
[46] sitting between these two cities
[47] are the mighty Alps.
[48] Now, don't get me wrong. It is a
[49] beautiful drive.
[50] But it takes you about 4 hours, and it
[51] would be the same if you were to go by
[52] train. However, it's not going to stay
[53] like that for much longer, because
[54] construction teams are now working on a
[55] new railway underneath this natural
[56] border. And they're doing it
[57] with a record-breaking tunnel.
[58] France and Italy are two of the largest
[59] economies on the planet, and they're
[60] situated right next to each other. But
[61] despite that, and the fact they're both
[62] part of the EU, moving people and goods
[63] between them isn't exactly
[64] straightforward.
[65] And it's because of those mountains.
[66] It's a difficult place to build a road,
[67] let alone a railway, which is why 92% of
[68] all freight movement between Italy and
[69] France is done by truck. Now, I probably
[70] don't need to tell you that road
[71] transportation is both worse for the
[72] environment and slower than going by
[73] train. So, something is finally being
[74] done about it.
[75] But it means going to some pretty
[76] extreme lengths. Now, as I said earlier,
[77] there already is a way to get from Lyon
[78] to Turin by train, as long as you don't
[79] mind traveling on a line that was built
[80] in the 1800s and is nowhere near
[81] high-speed, because it's full of winding
[82] curves and steep slopes.
[83] Not to mention the landslides, which are
[84] a very real threat here. The one that
[85] happened in 2023 was so severe, it
[86] caused the whole railway to shut down
[87] for a year and a half.
[88] Now, obviously, the way we build our
[89] railways has changed massively since the
[90] 19th century. Trains today are not just
[91] faster, safer, and more comfortable, but
[92] they can get across difficult terrain
[93] that just wouldn't have been possible
[94] all those years ago. Now, a lot of it is
[95] down to new tunneling techniques, but
[96] here in the Alps, engineers have been
[97] perfecting an approach that takes
[98] underground construction to a whole new
[99] level. They're called base tunnels,
[100] which comes from the fact that they
[101] burrow right through the base of a
[102] mountain. It means the tracks can be
[103] laid almost flat, and that enables
[104] faster trains and short journeys. And
[105] that's exactly what's under construction
[106] in here, halfway between Lyon and Turin,
[107] across the French-Italian border.
[108] Stretching for 57.5 km, it'll become the
[109] longest single rail tunnel in the
[110] world, a fraction longer than
[111] the Gotthard Base Tunnel in Switzerland.
[112] Although that one is almost a decade
[113] old, it remains one of the only base
[114] tunnels to have been completed on this
[115] planet.
[116] Thanks to this, the Mont Cenis Base
[117] Tunnel, as it's known,
[118] travel times between the two cities are
[119] going to be cut from 3 hours and 47
[120] minutes down to just 1 hour 47 minutes.
[121] It's not just about speed, of course.
[122] Once the new railway is complete,
[123] driving will no longer be the best way
[124] to get from A to B. Those road and rail
[125] movements are expected to become a lot
[126] more balanced, quite literally 50/50.
[127] It'll take around a million heavy
[128] vehicles off the road every year, or at
[129] least that's the aim. If achieved, it
[130] would mean an annual reduction of a
[131] million tons of CO2, which is roughly
[132] the same as 400,000 homes produce every
[133] 12 months.
[134] Freight trains are going to be able to
[135] carry 2,000 tons instead of 700 like
[136] they can now. And for passengers, there
[137] are going to be 22 long-distance rail
[138] services every day. That's up from the
[139] six there are right now.
[140] France and Italy won't be the only
[141] countries to gain from this project. The
[142] new line is going to fill a crucial gap
[143] in the Mediterranean Corridor of the
[144] Trans-European Transport Network. It's
[145] going to make traveling between the east
[146] and west of Europe a hell of a lot
[147] easier, boosting economic growth and
[148] helping sustainability. But before that
[149] dream can become a reality, there's a
[150] few challenges to overcome.
[151] So, this is the start of the massive
[152] Mont Cenis Base Tunnel on the French
[153] side. Trains are going to enter through
[154] a rectangular-shaped cut-and-cover
[155] section down there,
[156] and then come into this 3-km section,
[157] which passes through some particularly
[158] tough geology.
[159] Tests revealed that the ground here is
[160] full of fractured and sheared rock,
[161] which meant they had to do this section
[162] the old-fashioned way.
[163] Referring to the traditional tunneling
[164] method, otherwise known as drill and
[165] blast. Well, that, as the name suggests,
[166] involves drilling and blasting your way
[167] through the rock.
[168] The process is quite simple. You
[169] basically drill holes in a circle,
[170] fill them with dynamite,
[171] hit a big red button and blow them
[172] apart,
[173] clear the rubble out of the way using
[174] trucks,
[175] then put some steel ribs in to reinforce
[176] the rock around you,
[177] then spray that with shotcrete, kind of
[178] like a mix of sprayed concrete,
[179] basically, which you can see around me
[180] right now.
[181] As well up there is the rock face of the
[182] mountain. The really cool thing with
[183] this type of tunneling method is you
[184] actually get to see your adversary. You
[185] get to see the rock in front of you, the
[186] mountain that you're battling.
[187] >>
[188] >> More holes, more explosions, more rubble
[189] cleared away, more shotcrete, and then
[190] the same again, step by step, bit by
[191] bit.
[192] And this is small part of the project.
[193] We had 540 m of loose ground excavation,
[194] and then we continued on with the drill
[195] and blast method. We have outside works
[196] and inside works. We have special
[197] foundation works and tunneling works.
[198] And at the end of the project, we need
[199] to do 140 m of a cut-and-cover section,
[200] which is also particular for this side.
[201] So,
[202] this right here
[203] is where you really feel like you are
[204] digging through the heart of a mountain.
[205] I'm surrounded by these
[206] cold,
[207] craggy rock surfaces, which have been
[208] left behind by the drill and blast
[209] process. And you can see
[210] where the shotcrete's been applied to
[211] help stabilize the walls.
[212] A bit further along now, this is the
[213] process of converting a tunnel from that
[214] craggy drill and blast surface you saw
[215] to something that looks like a much more
[216] conventional tunnel.
[217] It took a couple months to design, to
[218] imagine, and then to manufacture this
[219] this country, which is a prototype, it's
[220] quite unique in the world. And we pour a
[221] bay of 10 m long every day,
[222] 5 days a week.
[223] You can see ahead of me here, they're
[224] doing this process, this waterproof
[225] membrane going in, this kind of thick
[226] sheet on the walls,
[227] followed by that kind of brownish-red
[228] steel reinforcement. That's going to sit
[229] inside the concrete. And then following
[230] that, that thick concrete slab.
[231] That tunnel lining system has been laid
[232] 10 m a day, every day, for 3 km under
[233] the Alps in just this section. But it
[234] has to be said,
[235] 3 km is a long way, especially when
[236] you're working in 10-m segments.
[237] But that is a mere fraction of the
[238] journey
[239] from France to Italy.
[240] Another thing that's very visible down
[241] here is how wet everything becomes
[242] before a section of the tunnel is fully
[243] waterproofed. In some places, it looks
[244] like a lot, but never enough to concern
[245] those in charge of the build. And we
[246] face in the Alps water ingress, which is
[247] normal. Basically, this is not bad for
[248] us, because we have long distances for
[249] the logistics, and we we like the water
[250] on the on the surface on the on the
[251] piste to avoid the dust problems, which
[252] is
[253] a severe problem for health and safety.
[254] So, basically, water is is nice for us.
[255] The water which is is too much, we pump
[256] it with different different pumping
[257] systems. We put it out in a treatment
[258] plant. We recycle it and we reuse it on
[259] the front for the drilling and
[260] excavation process.
[261] One thing mega builds like this are
[262] always guaranteed to do, every single
[263] time, is generate headlines. And
[264] they're not always entirely positive.
[265] When you're burrowing through the heart
[266] of a mountain, it's easy to get caught
[267] up in the insane construction and
[268] overlook the voices of those who have
[269] unfortunately objected to it, which is
[270] why I find Straight Arrow News so
[271] useful. A lot of news algorithms
[272] prioritize clicks over everything else,
[273] which can prevent us from getting the
[274] full picture. Articles from different
[275] sides of the political divide often
[276] report things very differently, and most
[277] of us are only served one side of the
[278] story. Straight Arrow News cuts through
[279] all of this. You're shown content from a
[280] wide spectrum of media free of bias,
[281] filter, or spin, meaning you can stay
[282] informed without all that unnecessary
[283] noise. One of my favorite features is
[284] media landscape, which groups
[285] sources reporting on a particular story
[286] from left to right according to their
[287] bias rating. It makes it much
[288] easier to assess which stories are being
[289] ignored or overly pushed by different
[290] groups. So, if you like the sound of
[291] skipping the drama and just getting
[292] straight to the facts, go ahead and
[293] download the Straight Arrow News app. It
[294] massively helps us here at the B1M when
[295] you guys take the time to go and check
[296] out our video sponsors,
[297] >>
[298] >> and this is one that you definitely
[299] don't want to miss. Now,
[300] let's get back to the Alps.
[301] The railway is going to be 270 km long.
[302] 70% of it sits in France, and 30% of it
[303] sits in Italy. Now, it's divided into
[304] three main parts. There's the
[305] cross-border section that consists of
[306] the main base tunnel and the bits either
[307] side that connect to the existing
[308] railway. That part of the project is
[309] being overseen by Tunnel Euralpin Lyon
[310] Turin or TELT. It's the public promoter
[311] in charge of the construction and
[312] management with ownership split 50/50
[313] between the French and Italian states.
[314] Then, you've got the segments that will
[315] run to the two cities, which include
[316] several more tunnels, albeit much, much
[317] shorter. In total, the cross-border
[318] section features 162 km of galleries and
[319] tunnels, including shafts and safety
[320] bypasses. Over a quarter of the tunnels,
[321] nearly 50 km worth, have now been
[322] completed. The base tunnel starts in
[323] Saint-Jean-de-Maurienne and ends in
[324] Susa. 45 km of it are on French soil, or
[325] rather in French soil, and the remaining
[326] 12.5 km are in Italy. And because trains
[327] are going to need to travel in both
[328] directions, there are actually two
[329] tubes, one on the north side and one on
[330] the south side. There's loads to be
[331] done, which is why when construction's
[332] at its peak, some 4,000 workers are
[333] going to be involved in this project
[334] across its multiple sites.
[335] So, in years to come, if you were to
[336] take a train journey from
[337] Lyon to Turin,
[338] this town is the last you'd see of
[339] France, the last you'd see of daylight
[340] before you headed down and went deep
[341] underground. It's this town right here.
[342] Now, there's already a pretty big train
[343] station here, but in years to come, it's
[344] going to be replaced by a much bigger
[345] international one.
[346] And it's the same story down at the
[347] other end in Italy, as well. A quiet,
[348] peaceful valley like this is going to
[349] become home to one of this continent's
[350] most important infrastructure projects.
[351] Speaking of which, it's about time we
[352] got back inside the tunnel to find out
[353] how the rest of it's being constructed.
[354] That drill and blast method is only
[355] being used to excavate around a quarter
[356] of the overall tunnel. Another
[357] technique, arguably even more dramatic,
[358] is needed for the rest.
[359] In total, seven tunnel boring machines
[360] are going to be working away under the
[361] Alps at the same time. And one of them,
[362] the first of them,
[363] called Viviana, is just ahead of me down
[364] there.
[365] It began its journey in September 2025,
[366] and its job
[367] is to dig a 9-km stretch of the overall
[368] route.
[369] That's the part between
[370] Saint-Martin-la-Porte and La Praz.
[371] Access tunnels have already been built
[372] in both of these locations, so it's now
[373] a case of joining them together, which,
[374] as you might guess, is not as easy as it
[375] sounds. I've been offered the chance to
[376] step on board the tunnel boring machine,
[377] or TBM, which has already been making
[378] noticeable progress. So, welcome on
[379] board Viviana. So, it's our first TBM on
[380] the project, launched 6 weeks ago. It's
[381] a unique machine.
[382] So, this machine is a hard rock TBM.
[383] And what's the diameter of the cutting
[384] head of this TBM? Uh this TBM is 10.4 m
[385] excavated diameter. 2,000 t
[386] in nominal mode. Yeah. Half of this
[387] weight is at the moment is at the front.
[388] What do you mean by the cutter heads?
[389] Well, it's another name for the face of
[390] the machine, which is made up of 61
[391] cutters that break up the rock as the
[392] machine moves through the mountain. It's
[393] fixed to the section at the front, which
[394] is known as the shield. This was
[395] transported into the tunnel at a 90°
[396] angle to the direction it needed to
[397] travel. That meant it had to be rotated
[398] before the rest of the TBM could be
[399] fully attached, because it's not all
[400] about the bit that does the actual
[401] digging. Behind the cutter head, another
[402] part of the system lays the concrete
[403] segments that form the lining of the
[404] tunnel, giving it extra stability.
[405] We
[406] have as a target to cast 100,000
[407] segments.
[408] 100,000 of these concrete segments.
[409] >> Yes.
[410] Wow.
[411] >> So, each of them are
[412] 50 cm thick. They are reinforced with
[413] rebar. Eight of them
[414] are sufficient to
[415] are needed to to form one ring. Yes.
[416] That shows you how long the tunnel is,
[417] isn't it? If you need eight in a ring,
[418] you're making 100,000, that's crazy.
[419] Further back still, a series of trailers
[420] help carry the excavated soil and rock
[421] back to the surface via a conveyor belt.
[422] More than half of that material is being
[423] reused on the same project. Some of it
[424] in the tunnel linings, but it's also
[425] finding its way into railway embankments
[426] and the new train stations.
[427] So, it does a lot more than just dig a
[428] big hole. It's essentially like a giant
[429] mobile factory, which is why it requires
[430] an entire team to operate it. There are
[431] 15 people all working together to run
[432] and supervise this machine's various
[433] functions.
[434] >>
[435] >> The red button. Yeah, can I press it?
[436] >> It's dangerous. Can I press it?
[437] You are from B1M.
[438] So, here we are in the control cabin.
[439] So, that's where the TBM by law
[440] operates. This is where they basically
[441] drive the TBM, control where it's going.
[442] A series of of monitors for different
[443] devices. For instance, here the the
[444] guidance of the of the machine. And here
[445] we can see the pressure into the jacks.
[446] So, here at the moment, the pressure is
[447] low because we are now in ring build
[448] mode.
[449] >> So, he thinks these jacks are in ring
[450] build mode at the moment, but when it
[451] comes to pushing forward, that's
[452] where the pressure comes, cuz they're
[453] pushing back on the tunnel to push the
[454] cutting head through the ground.
[455] >> Yes. And some of that is really tough
[456] ground, so you have to push quite
[457] hard.
[458] >> Yes. Yeah. Constructing a base tunnel
[459] isn't just drilling in parallel lines.
[460] The north and south tubes are linked at
[461] several points. Every 333 m, you'll find
[462] a small passage connecting the two sides
[463] of the main tunnel. They'll be used for
[464] maintenance and emergency escape routes
[465] in case one of the tunnels needs to be
[466] evacuated.
[467] But the problem with building such a
[468] lengthy tunnel and doing it through the
[469] base of a mountain is the uncertain
[470] geology.
[471] You might think they would have known
[472] from the beginning what kind of soil,
[473] rocks, and even fault lines they're
[474] going to find as they bore through, but
[475] you can never be absolutely certain,
[476] even with all of today's tech. The last
[477] thing you want to do is drill all that
[478] way and then encounter a major issue
[479] that could cause delays, put your teams
[480] at risk, or even stop the project
[481] entirely. And that's why teams have
[482] incredibly spent years
[483] digging exploratory tunnels to try and
[484] work out what's here before they go
[485] ahead and construct the main routes.
[486] One such tunnel was completed in 2022 to
[487] give planners a better idea of
[488] what to expect.
[489] Each moment, each phase of excavation,
[490] it can present some new surprise. We
[491] pass 80 different geological domain. So,
[492] a lot of different type of rocks, from
[493] the alluvial deposit at the entrance of
[494] the tunnel on the French side
[495] to the nice, one of the oldest rocks in
[496] the western Alps. These rocks, they have
[497] also a different behavior and the
[498] response to our
[499] excavation.
[500] Woah.
[501] Look at this.
[502] Size of this space.
[503] When we were driving down here, the guys
[504] were like,
[505] "Get ready for the cathedral." I was
[506] like, "What do you mean, the cathedral?"
[507] Now I see exactly what they mean.
[508] So, incredibly, I'm now
[509] halfway along the base tunnel, kind of
[510] halfway between France down there
[511] and Italy down there.
[512] But ahead of me is where
[513] the tunneling technique changes again.
[514] So, we're going from drill and blast.
[515] This huge cavern around me was created
[516] by drill and blast.
[517] And that concrete face you can see ahead
[518] of me up there
[519] is where the TBM's going to start
[520] drilling
[521] for 17 km in this instance, and actually
[522] break through across the border from
[523] France to Italy, connecting these two
[524] countries.
[525] To give them access to the base tunnel,
[526] seven huge caverns, up to 22 m high and
[527] 23 m wide, are being excavated. The TBMs
[528] are then going to be assembled inside.
[529] Once completed, they'll be tasked with
[530] digging the long section from the center
[531] of the tunnel all the way across the
[532] Italian border. Now, the machine that's
[533] going to be setting off here quite soon
[534] is pretty different from the one we saw
[535] earlier. Basically, it's what we call
[536] gripper TBM. As these TBMs are specially
[537] designed to mine and to go through hard
[538] rock condition. So, there is no precast
[539] segments
[540] elements like you have on the other
[541] project. On this one, we are going to
[542] mine,
[543] and depending on the geology, we are
[544] going to either shotcrete or install
[545] like bolts or steel frame to support the
[546] ground.
[547] Despite buzzing with excitement check
[548] out this incredible project.
[549] Wow, look at this.
[550] Look at this.
[551] Wow, this is amazing. I've got to say
[552] that traveling into a space so far
[553] underground was seriously daunting. At
[554] some points there were 600 m of solid
[555] rock above my head, equivalent
[556] to the heights of Merdeka 118, the
[557] world's second tallest building. Heading
[558] into the tunnels you encounter all kinds
[559] of signs that this is an extreme
[560] environment, including a strict protocol
[561] where people are counted in and out of
[562] the surface and have to wear location
[563] tags in case the worst happens. Then
[564] it's an eerily quiet drive down through
[565] rock that in a way hasn't seen the world
[566] since its formation nearly half a
[567] billion years ago.
[568] And then when you finally get down to
[569] where the action is, deep under the
[570] mountains, things are anything but
[571] quiet.
[572] It's remarkable. It is absolutely
[573] remarkable. I'm stood
[574] under a mountain. It doesn't really bear
[575] thinking about. There's all that stuff
[576] above my head. I'm down here. It's a
[577] hive of activity. There's men and women
[578] working away to connect two countries,
[579] boost economies,
[580] and change the world. It's epic epic
[581] stuff.
[582] Further down the line is where boring
[583] machines have once again been put into
[584] action. But these don't look anything
[585] like the ones we've already seen.
[586] Instead of going sideways across the
[587] rugged landscape, these teams have been
[588] drilling straight down. Four vertical
[589] shafts are under construction which will
[590] go all the way from the surface, 1,300 m
[591] above sea level, to the base tunnel
[592] under the mountain. They provide
[593] ventilation which is especially
[594] important when you're tens of kilometers
[595] inside a mountain. Without it the air
[596] wouldn't be breathable, either for the
[597] people working on the projects or if
[598] passengers need to be evacuated once the
[599] tunnels in service. First, a pilot hole
[600] roughly 40 cm in diameter is bored into
[601] the ground just big enough for a long
[602] metal bar to be slotted in all the way
[603] down to the tunnel. Where cavities occur
[604] a cylindrical metal formwork is placed
[605] inside allowing the gaps to be filled
[606] with concrete. Then a cutting head is
[607] attached to the bottom which is used to
[608] excavate back up to the surface. It's a
[609] technique borrowed from mining and
[610] they're known as raise boring machines,
[611] a kind of vertical TBM.
[612] The first of these shafts has already
[613] been excavated and covered with a
[614] temporary lining using this new
[615] type of robot that's placed in sight.
[616] While most of the activity on this
[617] project has been happening in France,
[618] things have started to ramp up on the
[619] Italian side as well. Preparations are
[620] in place for the facilities that will
[621] handle the making of the tunnel segments
[622] as well as the processing of the
[623] excavated material. A new junction of
[624] the elevated highway in Chiomonte is
[625] also in progress which vehicles are
[626] going to use to access the sites.
[627] Now one thing you can't help but notice
[628] with this mega build is that it's
[629] happening in a breathtakingly beautiful,
[630] peaceful, and serene valley. But that's
[631] not going to be the case for much
[632] longer. And because of that, many locals
[633] here have been against the railway.
[634] Since the very beginning the project's
[635] faced a backlash from protest groups
[636] looking to put a stop to its
[637] progress. 2023 saw more than 3,000
[638] demonstrators descend on the area I'm in
[639] now, resulting in injuries to both
[640] participants and police.
[641] They're unhappy with the environmental
[642] damage that they feel the new tunnel
[643] will cause, especially as there's
[644] already a railway connecting Lyon and
[645] Turin.
[646] So in other words, they feel it's not
[647] really needed. That's despite the new
[648] line being a lot faster, promising green
[649] benefits, and having less
[650] vulnerability to further landslides.
[651] The cost of all this is another sore
[652] point for a lot of people.
[653] Current estimates put the price tag at
[654] around 25 billion euros, which is
[655] approximately 29 billion US dollars.
[656] Almost half of that is being covered by
[657] EU funding while Italy is providing the
[658] larger portion of the remaining money.
[659] It's largely because it's committed more
[660] of its funding up front than France has,
[661] but also because the Italian side is
[662] more complex. The terrain is tougher,
[663] the access routes are tougher. It's
[664] genuinely a lot more difficult despite
[665] being shorter.
[666] When you visit here today you can
[667] clearly see that this is a mega build in
[668] full swing. But that hasn't always been
[669] the case. There have been delays,
[670] opposition from politicians as well as
[671] protesters, and financial uncertainty
[672] caused by gaps in the budget.
[673] That was until July 2025 when a new
[674] document was approved that set out the
[675] actions and timetable for the project. A
[676] joint commitment from France, Italy, and
[677] the EU, it confirmed the remaining
[678] schedule for the base tunnel which is
[679] expected to be commissioned by the end
[680] of 2033.
[681] It also resulted in all segments of the
[682] new railway securing EU funding for the
[683] first time.
[684] As for what remains on the schedule,
[685] it's a lot. There's almost three
[686] quarters of the tunneling work still on
[687] the to-do list.
[688] There are of course several years
[689] to go until that target
[690] completion date, but in the world of big
[691] infrastructure projects
[692] that can roll around fast.
[693] But now that all the civil works
[694] contracts for the base tunnel, which are
[695] worth several billion euros, have all
[696] been awarded, the rate of excavation is
[697] set to increase significantly.
[698] We have awarded all the contracts for
[699] the construction parts in France but
[700] also in Italy. And we are awarding right
[701] now the final global contracts for the
[702] the equipments. So we are now
[703] construction all the civil works. And we
[704] have to to imagine some some
[705] difficulties that that are on the table
[706] about the regulation, about the
[707] constraints. There is some construction
[708] difficulties of course, but there is a
[709] human challenge also.
[710] One decade from today this charming
[711] Alpine region is set to get a lot busier
[712] than it's already becoming with the
[713] construction work.
[714] By then we should hopefully know whether
[715] sacrificing some of that tranquility so
[716] the whole of Europe can prosper was the
[717] right call to make.
[718] To work on a a project that is a benefit
[719] for the future generation, that is a
[720] benefit for the environment, and that
[721] you will also save Europe. And for me
[722] I'm really proud to to work on this
[723] project, really.
[724] >>
[725] >> I've been truly blown away by what I've
[726] seen on this project.
[727] Like so many big infrastructure
[728] projects, there are questions here about
[729] its immediate impact and whether or not
[730] it's going to be worth in the long run.
[731] For whatever you think of that, what's
[732] undeniable is that this project is going
[733] to change our world. And the amazing men
[734] and women working deep beneath my feet
[735] at the minute are playing a huge
[736] part in making that happen.
[737] For the future when the the tunnel will
[738] be open, when I hope I will take the
[739] TGV and to to say
[740] I work on this site.
[741] It's very proud of it.
[742] They're going to bring two huge
[743] countries closer together. They're going
[744] to cut journey times. They're going to
[745] take almost a million trucks off the
[746] road cutting emissions.
[747] The impact of this is going to be felt
[748] by millions of people far beyond those
[749] actually using the tunnel
[750] itself.
[751] For me this project really does speak to
[752] the best of construction. It shows what
[753] we can achieve and the incredible impact
[754] that our work can have.
[755] Most of all it shows that
[756] whenever this industry is confronted
[757] with something that feels impossible
[758] we prove the world wrong.
[759] A huge thanks to Straight Arrow
[760] News for sponsoring this video. Don't
[761] forget guys, if you want to improve the
[762] way you get your news for the better, go
[763] ahead and download the Straight Arrow
[764] News app today. The link is down there
[765] in the video description.
[766] And as always guys, if you enjoyed this
[767] video and you want to dig deeper
[768] into the definitive video channel for
[769] construction, the channel that takes you
[770] into some of the world's longest
[771] tunnels, make sure you subscribe to the
[772] B1M.
[773] Well that fold that fold's clearly
[774] correct, isn't it? Cuz that was
[775] That looks like it was meant to be
[776] there. But we want to end up in there,
[777] so What have you done, Adam?
[778] Oh, this is a joke, isn't it? That must
[779] be No, no, that must be right. You can
[780] have You can say there's a million quid
[781] riding on this and I couldn't do it.
[782] I'll tell you what, I think I've done
[783] better than it was. No, it's not it, is
[784] it?
[785] >> [snorts]