[58] France and Italy are two of the largest
[59] economies on the planet, and they're
[60] situated right next to each other. But
[61] despite that, and the fact they're both
[62] part of the EU, moving people and goods
[63] between them isn't exactly
[64] straightforward.

[66] It's a difficult place to build a road,
[67] let alone a railway, which is why 92% of
[68] all freight movement between Italy and
[69] France is done by truck. Now, I probably
[70] don't need to tell you that road
[71] transportation is both worse for the
[72] environment and slower than going by
[73] train. So, something is finally being
[74] done about it.
[75] But it means going to some pretty
[76] extreme lengths. Now, as I said earlier,
[77] there already is a way to get from Lyon
[78] to Turin by train, as long as you don't
[79] mind traveling on a line that was built
[80] in the 1800s and is nowhere near
[81] high-speed, because it's full of winding
[82] curves and steep slopes.

[151] So, this is the start of the massive
[152] Mont Cenis Base Tunnel on the French
[153] side. Trains are going to enter through
[154] a rectangular-shaped cut-and-cover
[155] section down there,
[156] and then come into this 3-km section,
[157] which passes through some particularly
[158] tough geology.

[168] The process is quite simple. You
[169] basically drill holes in a circle,
[170] fill them with dynamite,
[171] hit a big red button and blow them
[172] apart,
[173] clear the rubble out of the way using
[174] trucks,
[175] then put some steel ribs in to reinforce
[176] the rock around you,
[177] then spray that with shotcrete, kind of
[178] like a mix of sprayed concrete,
[179] basically, which you can see around me
[180] right now.

[183] this type of tunneling method is you
[184] actually get to see your adversary. You
[185] get to see the rock in front of you, the
[186] mountain that you're battling.
[187] >>
[188] >> More holes, more explosions, more rubble
[189] cleared away, more shotcrete, and then
[190] the same again, step by step, bit by
[191] bit.

[223] You can see ahead of me here, they're
[224] doing this process, this waterproof
[225] membrane going in, this kind of thick
[226] sheet on the walls,
[227] followed by that kind of brownish-red
[228] steel reinforcement. That's going to sit
[229] inside the concrete. And then following
[230] that, that thick concrete slab.

[240] Another thing that's very visible down
[241] here is how wet everything becomes
[242] before a section of the tunnel is fully
[243] waterproofed. In some places, it looks
[244] like a lot, but never enough to concern
[245] those in charge of the build. And we
[246] face in the Alps water ingress, which is
[247] normal. Basically, this is not bad for
[248] us, because we have long distances for
[249] the logistics, and we we like the water
[250] on the on the surface on the on the
[251] piste to avoid the dust problems, which
[252] is
[253] a severe problem for health and safety.
[254] So, basically, water is is nice for us.

[265] When you're burrowing through the heart
[266] of a mountain, it's easy to get caught
[267] up in the insane construction and
[268] overlook the voices of those who have
[269] unfortunately objected to it, which is
[270] why I find Straight Arrow News so
[271] useful. A lot of news algorithms
[272] prioritize clicks over everything else,

[290] groups. So, if you like the sound of
[291] skipping the drama and just getting
[292] straight to the facts, go ahead and
[293] download the Straight Arrow News app. It
[294] massively helps us here at the B1M when
[295] you guys take the time to go and check
[296] out our video sponsors,

[314] Then, you've got the segments that will
[315] run to the two cities, which include
[316] several more tunnels, albeit much, much
[317] shorter. In total, the cross-border
[318] section features 162 km of galleries and
[319] tunnels, including shafts and safety
[320] bypasses. Over a quarter of the tunnels,

[335] So, in years to come, if you were to
[336] take a train journey from
[337] Lyon to Turin,
[338] this town is the last you'd see of
[339] France, the last you'd see of daylight
[340] before you headed down and went deep
[341] underground. It's this town right here.

[371] Access tunnels have already been built
[372] in both of these locations, so it's now
[373] a case of joining them together, which,
[374] as you might guess, is not as easy as it
[375] sounds. I've been offered the chance to

[383] And what's the diameter of the cutting
[384] head of this TBM? Uh this TBM is 10.4 m
[385] excavated diameter. 2,000 t
[386] in nominal mode. Yeah. Half of this
[387] weight is at the moment is at the front.

[427] So, it does a lot more than just dig a
[428] big hole. It's essentially like a giant
[429] mobile factory, which is why it requires
[430] an entire team to operate it. There are
[431] 15 people all working together to run
[432] and supervise this machine's various
[433] functions.

[449] >> So, he thinks these jacks are in ring
[450] build mode at the moment, but when it
[451] comes to pushing forward, that's
[452] where the pressure comes, cuz they're
[453] pushing back on the tunnel to push the
[454] cutting head through the ground.

[491] pass 80 different geological domain. So,
[492] a lot of different type of rocks, from
[493] the alluvial deposit at the entrance of
[494] the tunnel on the French side
[495] to the nice, one of the oldest rocks in
[496] the western Alps. These rocks, they have
[497] also a different behavior and the
[498] response to our
[499] excavation.

[517] And that concrete face you can see ahead
[518] of me up there
[519] is where the TBM's going to start
[520] drilling
[521] for 17 km in this instance, and actually
[522] break through across the border from
[523] France to Italy, connecting these two
[524] countries.

[532] Italian border. Now, the machine that's
[533] going to be setting off here quite soon
[534] is pretty different from the one we saw
[535] earlier. Basically, it's what we call
[536] gripper TBM. As these TBMs are specially

[553] underground was seriously daunting. At
[554] some points there were 600 m of solid
[555] rock above my head, equivalent
[556] to the heights of Merdeka 118, the
[557] world's second tallest building. Heading
[558] into the tunnels you encounter all kinds
[559] of signs that this is an extreme
[560] environment, including a strict protocol
[561] where people are counted in and out of
[562] the surface and have to wear location
[563] tags in case the worst happens. Then

[572] It's remarkable. It is absolutely
[573] remarkable. I'm stood
[574] under a mountain. It doesn't really bear
[575] thinking about. There's all that stuff
[576] above my head. I'm down here. It's a

[588] drilling straight down. Four vertical
[589] shafts are under construction which will
[590] go all the way from the surface, 1,300 m
[591] above sea level, to the base tunnel
[592] under the mountain. They provide
[593] ventilation which is especially
[594] important when you're tens of kilometers
[595] inside a mountain. Without it the air
[596] wouldn't be breathable, either for the
[597] people working on the projects or if
[598] passengers need to be evacuated once the
[599] tunnels in service. First, a pilot hole
[600] roughly 40 cm in diameter is bored into
[601] the ground just big enough for a long
[602] metal bar to be slotted in all the way
[603] down to the tunnel. Where cavities occur
[604] a cylindrical metal formwork is placed
[605] inside allowing the gaps to be filled
[606] with concrete. Then a cutting head is
[607] attached to the bottom which is used to
[608] excavate back up to the surface. It's a

[616] While most of the activity on this
[617] project has been happening in France,
[618] things have started to ramp up on the
[619] Italian side as well. Preparations are
[620] in place for the facilities that will
[621] handle the making of the tunnel segments
[622] as well as the processing of the
[623] excavated material. A new junction of

[641] They're unhappy with the environmental
[642] damage that they feel the new tunnel
[643] will cause, especially as there's
[644] already a railway connecting Lyon and
[645] Turin.
[646] So in other words, they feel it's not
[647] really needed. That's despite the new
[648] line being a lot faster, promising green
[649] benefits, and having less
[650] vulnerability to further landslides.

[666] When you visit here today you can
[667] clearly see that this is a mega build in
[668] full swing. But that hasn't always been
[669] the case. There have been delays,
[670] opposition from politicians as well as
[671] protesters, and financial uncertainty
[672] caused by gaps in the budget.

[700] also in Italy. And we are awarding right
[701] now the final global contracts for the
[702] the equipments. So we are now
[703] construction all the civil works. And we

[724] >>
[725] >> I've been truly blown away by what I've
[726] seen on this project.
[727] Like so many big infrastructure
[728] projects, there are questions here about
[729] its immediate impact and whether or not
[730] it's going to be worth in the long run.

[759] A huge thanks to Straight Arrow
[760] News for sponsoring this video. Don't
[761] forget guys, if you want to improve the
[762] way you get your news for the better, go
[763] ahead and download the Straight Arrow
[764] News app today. The link is down there
[765] in the video description.
[766] And as always guys, if you enjoyed this
[767] video and you want to dig deeper
[768] into the definitive video channel for
[769] construction, the channel that takes you
[770] into some of the world's longest
[771] tunnels, make sure you subscribe to the
[772] B1M.

[774] correct, isn't it? Cuz that was
[775] That looks like it was meant to be
[776] there. But we want to end up in there,
[777] so What have you done, Adam?
