[66] It's a difficult place to build a road,
[67] let alone a railway, which is why 92% of
[68] all freight movement between Italy and
[69] France is done by truck. Now, I probably
[70] don't need to tell you that road
[71] transportation is both worse for the
[72] environment and slower than going by
[73] train. So, something is finally being
[74] done about it.

[77] there already is a way to get from Lyon
[78] to Turin by train, as long as you don't
[79] mind traveling on a line that was built
[80] in the 1800s and is nowhere near
[81] high-speed, because it's full of winding
[82] curves and steep slopes.
[83] Not to mention the landslides, which are
[84] a very real threat here. The one that
[85] happened in 2023 was so severe, it
[86] caused the whole railway to shut down
[87] for a year and a half.

[151] So, this is the start of the massive
[152] Mont Cenis Base Tunnel on the French
[153] side. Trains are going to enter through
[154] a rectangular-shaped cut-and-cover
[155] section down there,
[156] and then come into this 3-km section,
[157] which passes through some particularly
[158] tough geology.

[169] basically drill holes in a circle,
[170] fill them with dynamite,
[171] hit a big red button and blow them
[172] apart,
[173] clear the rubble out of the way using
[174] trucks,
[175] then put some steel ribs in to reinforce
[176] the rock around you,
[177] then spray that with shotcrete, kind of
[178] like a mix of sprayed concrete,
[179] basically, which you can see around me
[180] right now.

[223] You can see ahead of me here, they're
[224] doing this process, this waterproof
[225] membrane going in, this kind of thick
[226] sheet on the walls,
[227] followed by that kind of brownish-red
[228] steel reinforcement. That's going to sit
[229] inside the concrete. And then following
[230] that, that thick concrete slab.
[231] That tunnel lining system has been laid
[232] 10 m a day, every day, for 3 km under
[233] the Alps in just this section. But it

[240] Another thing that's very visible down
[241] here is how wet everything becomes
[242] before a section of the tunnel is fully
[243] waterproofed. In some places, it looks
[244] like a lot, but never enough to concern
[245] those in charge of the build. And we
[246] face in the Alps water ingress, which is
[247] normal. Basically, this is not bad for
[248] us, because we have long distances for
[249] the logistics, and we we like the water
[250] on the on the surface on the on the
[251] piste to avoid the dust problems, which
[252] is
[253] a severe problem for health and safety.
[254] So, basically, water is is nice for us.
[255] The water which is is too much, we pump
[256] it with different different pumping
[257] systems. We put it out in a treatment
[258] plant. We recycle it and we reuse it on
[259] the front for the drilling and
[260] excavation process.

[265] When you're burrowing through the heart
[266] of a mountain, it's easy to get caught
[267] up in the insane construction and
[268] overlook the voices of those who have
[269] unfortunately objected to it, which is
[270] why I find Straight Arrow News so
[271] useful. A lot of news algorithms
[272] prioritize clicks over everything else,

[335] So, in years to come, if you were to
[336] take a train journey from
[337] Lyon to Turin,
[338] this town is the last you'd see of
[339] France, the last you'd see of daylight
[340] before you headed down and went deep
[341] underground. It's this town right here.

[427] So, it does a lot more than just dig a
[428] big hole. It's essentially like a giant
[429] mobile factory, which is why it requires
[430] an entire team to operate it. There are
[431] 15 people all working together to run
[432] and supervise this machine's various
[433] functions.

[449] >> So, he thinks these jacks are in ring
[450] build mode at the moment, but when it
[451] comes to pushing forward, that's
[452] where the pressure comes, cuz they're
[453] pushing back on the tunnel to push the
[454] cutting head through the ground.

[517] And that concrete face you can see ahead
[518] of me up there
[519] is where the TBM's going to start
[520] drilling
[521] for 17 km in this instance, and actually
[522] break through across the border from
[523] France to Italy, connecting these two
[524] countries.

[529] Once completed, they'll be tasked with
[530] digging the long section from the center
[531] of the tunnel all the way across the
[532] Italian border. Now, the machine that's
[533] going to be setting off here quite soon
[534] is pretty different from the one we saw
[535] earlier. Basically, it's what we call
[536] gripper TBM. As these TBMs are specially

[558] into the tunnels you encounter all kinds
[559] of signs that this is an extreme
[560] environment, including a strict protocol
[561] where people are counted in and out of
[562] the surface and have to wear location
[563] tags in case the worst happens. Then

[588] drilling straight down. Four vertical
[589] shafts are under construction which will
[590] go all the way from the surface, 1,300 m
[591] above sea level, to the base tunnel
[592] under the mountain. They provide
[593] ventilation which is especially
[594] important when you're tens of kilometers
[595] inside a mountain. Without it the air
[596] wouldn't be breathable, either for the
[597] people working on the projects or if
[598] passengers need to be evacuated once the
[599] tunnels in service. First, a pilot hole
[600] roughly 40 cm in diameter is bored into
[601] the ground just big enough for a long
[602] metal bar to be slotted in all the way
[603] down to the tunnel. Where cavities occur
[604] a cylindrical metal formwork is placed
[605] inside allowing the gaps to be filled
[606] with concrete. Then a cutting head is
[607] attached to the bottom which is used to
[608] excavate back up to the surface. It's a
[609] technique borrowed from mining and
[610] they're known as raise boring machines,
[611] a kind of vertical TBM.

[616] While most of the activity on this
[617] project has been happening in France,
[618] things have started to ramp up on the
[619] Italian side as well. Preparations are
[620] in place for the facilities that will
[621] handle the making of the tunnel segments
[622] as well as the processing of the
[623] excavated material. A new junction of

[666] When you visit here today you can
[667] clearly see that this is a mega build in
[668] full swing. But that hasn't always been
[669] the case. There have been delays,
[670] opposition from politicians as well as
[671] protesters, and financial uncertainty
[672] caused by gaps in the budget.

[759] A huge thanks to Straight Arrow
[760] News for sponsoring this video. Don't
[761] forget guys, if you want to improve the
[762] way you get your news for the better, go
[763] ahead and download the Straight Arrow
[764] News app today. The link is down there
[765] in the video description.
