[1] Imagine a storm so powerful it can wash
[2] away roads,
[3] destroy an entire neighborhood,
[4] or even collapse a mountain.
[5] Now, imagine taking that terrifying
[6] power of nature and being able to
[7] control it with the push of a button.
[8] That's what happens here inside this
[9] building in Japan. So, what is
[10] it? How was it built? And how was I
[11] talked into going for a walk in the
[12] rainiest place on earth?
[13] It
[14] >> is what it is.
[15] >> Did you get that? So, here we are. We're
[16] at the large scale rainfall simulator
[17] just outside Tokyo in Japan. Large scale
[18] is a good way of putting it cuz it is
[19] absolutely enormous. It's like an
[20] aircraft hanger. Much bigger than I was
[21] expecting. To be quite honest, I've been
[22] dreading this moment. I've been building
[23] up to today. What the production team
[24] have told me is that the US Geological
[25] Survey say that 8 mm of rainfall 1 hour
[26] is classified as heavy rain and that the
[27] machine behind me can go up to 300 mm an
[28] hour, which isn't necessary. It's not
[29] natural. I don't need to put in that
[30] kind of scenario, but for your viewing
[31] pleasure, we're doing it. So, here we
[32] go. I've brought my umbrella, which is
[33] one of these lovely clear Japanese
[34] umbrellas,
[35] but um not sure it's going to be enough.
[36] Just before the ritual humiliation,
[37] let's actually do some work. Before we
[38] get to know how this place was built and
[39] why it's necessary, we need to discuss
[40] the strange quirk of Japanese housing.
[41] What you're looking at here is a typical
[42] Japanese house. Now, while the major
[43] cities are dominated by those mid and
[44] high-rise apartment blocks, it's houses
[45] like these that you're going to find in
[46] towns, villages, and suburbs right
[47] across the country. If you're thinking
[48] of moving to Japan and you want to find
[49] a bargain, it's a house like this you'll
[50] want. And the older the better. That's
[51] because unlike basically every other
[52] country on Earth, housing in Japan loses
[53] value over time. After about 30 years,
[54] houses like these are going to be
[55] knocked down and replaced by a newer
[56] model. But why? Well, close your eyes
[57] and picture the Japanese countryside.
[58] Maybe you're imagining lush mountains
[59] and valleys, steaming hot
[60] springs, and ancient temples. A place
[61] that reflects a deeprooted connection
[62] with nature. And you'd be right. But
[63] that connection isn't always as peaceful
[64] as it seems.
[65] Japan only exists because of nature's
[66] raw power. It was forged when massive
[67] tectonic forces pushed it out of the sea
[68] millions of years ago. It gives this
[69] nation a stunning landscape, but it's
[70] also made it the most earthquake-p prone
[71] country on the planet. Japan faces some
[72] of the world's most violent storms.
[73] Typhoons regularly sweep through,
[74] bringing torrential rain, devastating
[75] floods, and powerful winds that can tear
[76] rooftops apart. As if all of that wasn't
[77] enough, with over 80% of Japan covered
[78] in mountains, those torrential storms
[79] bring another very real threat.
[80] Landslides. Even if your house survives
[81] an earthquake, it could easily be swept
[82] away in a river of mud and rock. It's
[83] largely because of all this that the
[84] idea of impermanence, that nothing lasts
[85] forever, has been really ingrained in
[86] Japanese culture, even in something as
[87] solid as a house. It's why many homes
[88] are built with semi-permanent
[89] pre-fabricated designs, not as a sign of
[90] weakness, but as a smart, pragmatic
[91] response to an unpredictable landscape.
[92] But that's only half the response. The
[93] other half is worldleading research into
[94] floodproof urban planning and landslide
[95] prediction technology. This is Sakuba.
[96] It sits 75 km northeast of Tokyo and has
[97] a very good claim to being the
[98] scientific center of Japan. It's home to
[99] both the Japanese Space Agency and the
[100] headquarters of the snapply named
[101] National Research Institute for Earth
[102] Science and Disaster Prevention, which
[103] they helpfully shorten to NIED. Now we
[104] came here when we were making our epic
[105] documentary about Tokyo's disaster
[106] resilience infrastructure and we
[107] just couldn't leave without seeing
[108] inside this building.
[109] >> Then this building established is a 1974
[110] and uh this is a big time is coming in
[111] the damage. So damage affected in Japan
[112] that now we are research on the
[113] mechanism on flooding and the land rise
[114] in the using this facility. There are
[115] simulators like these around the world,
[116] but none match the size or sheer power
[117] of this place. As I mentioned, the US
[118] Geological Survey classifies very heavy
[119] rain as ranging from 8 to 10 mm
[120] per hour. But here, that's not even the
[121] first rung on the ladder.
[122] >> In system is a 50 mm power to 300 mm
[123] power. This is very wide range. 300 mm
[124] an hour is just shy of the strongest
[125] rainfall ever recorded back in
[126] 1947.
[127] But we do begin tonight with this
[128] category 4 hurricane slamming into the
[129] US.
[130] >> To put that into context, when the
[131] devastating hurricane Ida hit the US
[132] back in 2021, the maximum rainfall
[133] recorded in one day was just 200 mm.
[134] We're going to get to why on earth it's
[135] necessary to reproduce such torrential
[136] conditions shortly, but first off, a bit
[137] about how this place works. The
[138] simulator consists of a huge 75x 15 m
[139] hanger. This suspends a lattis work of
[140] thousands of pipes and nozzles 16 m
[141] above the ground high enough for the
[142] droplets to reach terminal velocity.
[143] These are connected to a pipe on the
[144] outside of the building which feeds
[145] water in from an underground reservoir.
[146] Running along the outside of the test
[147] area is a series of drains which
[148] collects the water and stops flooding.
[149] This test space is used to trial
[150] everything from homes to self-driving
[151] cars. for tests on soil erosion and
[152] landslides. Other areas of the site have
[153] permanent facilities set up where
[154] experiments can be constructed. But hold
[155] on, how do you carry out tests in
[156] different areas? Well, as if this
[157] building wasn't impressive enough
[158] already, get this. It moves.
[159] The building is movable system. You can
[160] see the rail long rail 400 over rail in
[161] the right left side. This building is
[162] moving by electric motor each wheel.
[163] >> This vast building effectively works as
[164] a self-powered railway carriage moving
[165] at a speed of about 1 m a minute.
[166] >> This is over 3,000 square meter in the
[167] rainfall area is very very big.
[168] >> So how does all this relate to housing
[169] in Japan? Well, landslides are very
[170] common here. They're also deadly,
[171] responsible for around half the
[172] fatalities and missing people in natural
[173] disasters. Japan's Met Office issues
[174] warnings to help people evacuate their
[175] homes and workplaces before the worst
[176] happens. But because landslides occur so
[177] quickly, it's a constant challenge to be
[178] able to warn people in time. That's
[179] where the work of Dr. Sakai comes in.
[180] >> And now our research aim is a resilience
[181] for the people. We are development
[182] sensor for the thro condition. Sensor
[183] data is a checking the safe or not. It
[184] is very important using the positivity
[185] testing.
[186] >> What makes the research here so unique
[187] is the scale of the experiments
[188] undertaken. Tests like this give
[189] researchers like Dr. Sakai much more
[190] reliable insights than smaller scale
[191] projects. But it's not just the size of
[192] the experiments here that make this
[193] place unique. Being able to reproduce a
[194] variety of rain conditions involves more
[195] than just cranking up the power. This
[196] system is a like a natural rainfall
[197] condition and uh this is a natural
[198] rainfall state is a rainfall drop size
[199] and the rainfall speed and uh intensity.
[200] >> It's being able to control the droplet
[201] size, speed, and intensity that makes
[202] this simulator so unique. It sprays
[203] water from 2,176
[204] nozzles of four different types that can
[205] reproduce raindrops from 0.1 to 8 mm in
[206] size. The bigger the size of the
[207] droplet, the faster it falls. And the
[208] height of the nozzles helps distribute
[209] the rain over an equal area. Discovering
[210] more about the science of what causes
[211] mountains to collapse is only part of
[212] the research that goes on here to help
[213] save lives and property. This is an
[214] experiment by Ichio Cottoman, an NED to
[215] develop the world's first floodproof
[216] house. Now, flooding is usually
[217] impossible to stop in a house because
[218] there are so many entry points, but this
[219] house was fitted with a series of
[220] countermeasures to stop it from filling
[221] up. The windows were sealed with a
[222] hollow gasket similar to that used on
[223] car doors. The air vents are fitted with
[224] a float valve which blocks the water
[225] coming in through the airway. Utility
[226] pipes entering the building are also
[227] insulated by a backflow
[228] prevention valve which allows rainwater
[229] to leave but not enter the property.
[230] It's an incredible development that just
[231] wouldn't have been possible
[232] without this facility. If you enjoyed
[233] this video and you want to get more from
[234] the definitive video, okay, okay, I
[235] can't sign off yet. They want to put
[236] this bit in. So, here you go, guys.
[237] Here's a couple of minutes of me getting
[238] wet.
[239] Now, I'm not really sure what the dress
[240] code is for a large scale rainfor
[241] simulator to be quite honest, but I've
[242] sort of just worn stuff that can get wet
[243] and then they give me these wellies
[244] which makes it look like I've walked out
[245] the village people.
[246] >> I hate you so much right now.
[247] Oh, here we go.
[248] The moment has arrived.
[249] What is coming out of the
[250] park?
[251] I want two quid umbrella. Do me proud.
[252] Oh god. Here we go.
[253] It's a bit much for light rain.
[254] Absolutely hammering it down.
[255] Oh my god.
[256] Good lord,
[257] the stuff I do for YouTube.
[258] I want a little island of dry now.
[259] >> This is light rain.
[260] >> Go for it.
[261] >> This is light rain.
[262] >> I mean, he's just told me that's light
[263] rain, which blows my mind because I
[264] wouldn't think it could rain more than
[265] that, but it's about to apparently. Hey,
[266] it's a good ad for the $2 umbrella,
[267] right?
[268] >> Mic off. Yeah.
[269] >> Yeah.
[270] Heat. Heat.
[271] Hope you enjoyed that. I'm now
[272] absolutely soaked. I've never seen rain
[273] like it. It's completely unnecessary,
[274] completely unnatural. But yeah, there
[275] you go. I'm absolutely soaked to the
[276] bone.
[277] Well, I [snorts] didn't enjoy that
[278] video, but if you enjoyed that video and
[279] you want to get more from the
[280] definitive video channel for
[281] construction, the channel that puts me
[282] in some of the wetest places imaginable
[283] while you sit in the dry and watch. Hit
[284] that subscribe button. Well, it was wet
[285] to be honest. That was my my biggest
[286] takeaway was water. You can see it's
[287] like it's just been a monsoon. You
[288] wouldn't believe it now, but you
[289] couldn't see out that door. It was
[290] actually surprisingly warm. Actually
[291] quite refreshing on such a hot day in
[292] Japan. I've never had rain actually hit
[293] me and hurt me before, but that was like
[294] a mixture of the drops were so big. Like
[295] a mixture of hail and just being hit
[296] with three showers at once. Really? At
[297] least
[298] >> you got your helmet on, though.
[299] Not right now.