[29] natural. I don't need to put in that
[30] kind of scenario, but for your viewing
[31] pleasure, we're doing it. So, here we
[32] go. I've brought my umbrella, which is
[33] one of these lovely clear Japanese
[34] umbrellas,

[42] Japanese house. Now, while the major
[43] cities are dominated by those mid and
[44] high-rise apartment blocks, it's houses
[45] like these that you're going to find in
[46] towns, villages, and suburbs right
[47] across the country. If you're thinking
[48] of moving to Japan and you want to find
[49] a bargain, it's a house like this you'll
[50] want. And the older the better. That's

[73] Typhoons regularly sweep through,
[74] bringing torrential rain, devastating
[75] floods, and powerful winds that can tear
[76] rooftops apart. As if all of that wasn't
[77] enough, with over 80% of Japan covered
[78] in mountains, those torrential storms
[79] bring another very real threat.

[234] the definitive video, okay, okay, I
[235] can't sign off yet. They want to put
[236] this bit in. So, here you go, guys.

[271] Hope you enjoyed that. I'm now
[272] absolutely soaked. I've never seen rain
[273] like it. It's completely unnecessary,
[274] completely unnatural. But yeah, there

[277] Well, I [snorts] didn't enjoy that
[278] video, but if you enjoyed that video and
[279] you want to get more from the
[280] definitive video channel for
[281] construction, the channel that puts me
[282] in some of the wetest places imaginable
[283] while you sit in the dry and watch. Hit
[284] that subscribe button. Well, it was wet
[285] to be honest. That was my my biggest
[286] takeaway was water. You can see it's
[287] like it's just been a monsoon. You
