[42] Japanese house. Now, while the major
[43] cities are dominated by those mid and
[44] high-rise apartment blocks, it's houses
[45] like these that you're going to find in
[46] towns, villages, and suburbs right
[47] across the country. If you're thinking
[48] of moving to Japan and you want to find
[49] a bargain, it's a house like this you'll
[50] want. And the older the better. That's
[51] because unlike basically every other
[52] country on Earth, housing in Japan loses
[53] value over time. After about 30 years,
[54] houses like these are going to be
[55] knocked down and replaced by a newer
[56] model. But why? Well, close your eyes

[60] springs, and ancient temples. A place
[61] that reflects a deeprooted connection
[62] with nature. And you'd be right. But

[73] Typhoons regularly sweep through,
[74] bringing torrential rain, devastating
[75] floods, and powerful winds that can tear
[76] rooftops apart. As if all of that wasn't
[77] enough, with over 80% of Japan covered
[78] in mountains, those torrential storms
[79] bring another very real threat.

[188] undertaken. Tests like this give
[189] researchers like Dr. Sakai much more
[190] reliable insights than smaller scale
[191] projects. But it's not just the size of
[192] the experiments here that make this
[193] place unique. Being able to reproduce a
[194] variety of rain conditions involves more
[195] than just cranking up the power. This

[202] this simulator so unique. It sprays
[203] water from 2,176
[204] nozzles of four different types that can
[205] reproduce raindrops from 0.1 to 8 mm in
[206] size. The bigger the size of the
[207] droplet, the faster it falls. And the
[208] height of the nozzles helps distribute
[209] the rain over an equal area. Discovering
[210] more about the science of what causes
[211] mountains to collapse is only part of
[212] the research that goes on here to help
[213] save lives and property. This is an
[214] experiment by Ichio Cottoman, an NED to
[215] develop the world's first floodproof
[216] house. Now, flooding is usually
[217] impossible to stop in a house because
[218] there are so many entry points, but this
[219] house was fitted with a series of
[220] countermeasures to stop it from filling
[221] up. The windows were sealed with a
[222] hollow gasket similar to that used on
[223] car doors. The air vents are fitted with
[224] a float valve which blocks the water
[225] coming in through the airway. Utility

[230] It's an incredible development that just
[231] wouldn't have been possible
[232] without this facility. If you enjoyed
[233] this video and you want to get more from
[234] the definitive video, okay, okay, I

[277] Well, I [snorts] didn't enjoy that
[278] video, but if you enjoyed that video and
[279] you want to get more from the
[280] definitive video channel for
[281] construction, the channel that puts me
[282] in some of the wetest places imaginable
[283] while you sit in the dry and watch. Hit

[290] actually surprisingly warm. Actually
[291] quite refreshing on such a hot day in
[292] Japan. I've never had rain actually hit
[293] me and hurt me before, but that was like
[294] a mixture of the drops were so big. Like
