[21] was entirely different. They were tasked
[22] with building an airport on a swamp
[23] covered in unstable mud flats, a giant
[24] hill, and a river flowing right through
[25] the middle of it. While the renders of
[26] Navi Mumbai International look
[27] spectacular, this airport's location has
[28] been an absolute nightmare.

[64] is already at capacity. Terminal one
[65] over here is going through a
[66] redevelopment, but there isn't exactly a
[67] lot of scope for expanding the
[68] footprints. On every side, there are
[69] densely packed communities that would be
[70] a nightmare to move, and it's not like
[71] they didn't try. That evidence can be
[72] found over at Terminal 2. The concourses
[73] here are asymmetrical. The initial plan
[74] was for them to be the same length, but
[75] because of the challenges faced in
[76] moving communities on the airport
[77] boundary, the second concourse had to be
[78] redesigned. It looks like it's been cut
[79] off and that obviously limits the number
[80] of gates that are available. Air traffic

[84] strip at the same time. And as we
[85] pointed out, it's not like there's a lot
[86] of space to build parallel runways
[87] elsewhere. The result is that Mumbai is
[88] missing out on potentially millions of
[89] passengers and tons of cargo every year,
[90] and the city's key airport really is
[91] crying out for help. But clearly a major

[103] coast. That means it's built largely on
[104] reclaimed land and that's required a lot
[105] of preparation. Now, before we go any
[106] further with today's video, we need to
[107] stop everything because I have got some
[108] very big news that I am finally allowed
[109] to share. Last year, Penguin Random
[110] House asked me if I'd like to write a
[111] book. I said yes. I've written a book

[144] So guys, if you love the B1M, if you
[145] love these stories, if you love learning
[146] more about construction in a
[147] downto-earth way that's easy to
[148] understand and can be read by anyone, go
[149] and pre-order my book, Mega Builds,
[150] today. Before any work could start on

[158] Obviously, having a hill in the middle
[159] of your concourse isn't exactly ideal.
[160] So, that had to be completely flattened
[161] before any building could take place.
[162] Construction crews demolished 62 million
[163] cub m of rock through controlled
[164] blasting to protect surrounding
[165] villages. But once that was finished,

[174] begin. To do that, they had to raise the
[175] ground by around 6 m. And conveniently,
[176] they had enormous amounts of rock
[177] available from that big old hill they'
[178] just blown up. What's really cool is
[179] that these guys blasted the rock at
[180] specific explosive power designations to
[181] create rock fragments that were the
[182] ideal size for land development and
[183] reclamation. The blasted rock was

[192] Originally, it cut through the middle of
[193] the site, but beyond acting as an
[194] interesting water feature, a river
[195] through a runway is actually incredibly
[196] impractical. Engineers were left with no
[197] choice but to redirect it. You can see
[198] it's been cut at an angle, diverting
[199] around the site. And if you're thinking
[200] it now looks bigger, then you'd be
[201] right. Navim Mumbai Airport is
[202] surrounded by villages whose people have
[203] watched this site completely transform.

[277] incredibly practical. And actually, I
[278] just want to touch on the site location
[279] one more time because sure, we've
[280] already shown you how far this is from
[281] the city. And yes, moving away from the
[282] hustle and bustle means you have more
[283] room to play with. That's

[328] Don't forget that we're raising
[329] awareness of construction's mental
[330] health crisis and supporting charities
[331] in this space through our get
[332] construction initiative. You can learn
[333] more and find links to supports over at
[334] getconstructionalking.org.
[335] And as always guys, if you enjoyed this
[336] video and you want to get more from the
[337] definitive video channel for
[338] construction, make sure you're
[339] subscribed to the B1M.
