# Intro

[1] This might just be India's answer to Changi.
[2] It's called Navim Mumbai International Airport and it opened its terminals to passengers in December last year.
[3] The place looks pretty stunning and that's just phase 1. Once the final phase is complete, Navi Mumbai will welcome an astounding 90 million passengers a year, 20 million more than Changi.
[4] India wants this to become a hub for world travel.
[5] Now, you'd be right to raise an eyebrow to any newcomer being compared to Singapore's Pride and Joy.
[6] That is arguably the best airport in the world.
[7] But don't forget that Changi was a military air base long before it became a civilian facility. The engineers behind Navi Mumbai could only dream of building on an air base. Their reality was entirely different.
[8] They were tasked with building an airport on a swamp covered in unstable mud flats, a giant hill, and a river flowing right through the middle of it.
[9] While the renders of Navi Mumbai International look spectacular, this airport's location has been an absolute nightmare.
# Mumbai's space problem

[10] India has one of the fastest growing aviation sectors on the planet behind only China and the US.
[11] The number of operational airports in the country has doubled in the last decade as Prime Minister Narendra Modi looks set to overhaul India's travel infrastructure.
[12] Mumbai, its financial powerhouse is under resourced.
[13] A number of the world's most prominent cities feature multiple major airports. Think London, New York or Tokyo.
[14] And that's obviously crucial for visitor numbers, business trips and cargo.
[15] Let's take London for example.
[16] The city is serviced by six major airports. All of those combined handled a whopping 177 million passengers in 2024. Mumbai, however, has historically had just one major airport.
[17] That would be like London having just Heathrow. The city would miss out on nearly 100 million passengers every year.
[18] And given that rapidly growing aviation sector in India, the country is desperate to improve capacity to its financial capital.
[19] The answer authorities came up with was simple.
[20] a second major airport in Mumbai.
[21] But executing an idea of this scale is rarely as straightforward as having the epiphany itself. The biggest problem faced by Mumbai's second big airport plan is experienced by major cities all around the world. The lack of space.
[22] Just take a look at Mumbai airport which is already at capacity.
[23] Terminal one over here is going through a redevelopment, but there isn't exactly a lot of scope for expanding the footprints.
[24] On every side, there are densely packed communities that would be a nightmare to move, and it's not like they didn't try.
[25] That evidence can be found over at Terminal 2.
[26] The concourses here are asymmetrical.
[27] The initial plan was for them to be the same length, but because of the challenges faced in moving communities on the airport boundary, the second concourse had to be redesigned.
[28] It looks like it's been cut off and that obviously limits the number of gates that are available.
[29] Air traffic is also pretty restricted because of the intersecting runways.
[30] The design stops planes landing and taking off on each strip at the same time.
[31] And as we pointed out, it's not like there's a lot of space to build parallel runways elsewhere.
[32] The result is that Mumbai is missing out on potentially millions of passengers and tons of cargo every year, and the city's key airport really is crying out for help.
[33] But clearly a major expansion is out of the question, as is constructing a massive new airport anywhere near the city center.
[34] So where do you go?
# Mumbai's big new airport

[35] Well, after a 10year search and then a further 3 years spent buying up land, officials ended up here. It's about 40 km away from the old commercial center of Mumbai over in Nav'i Mumbai.
[36] In what's become a growing trend over the last decade, the Nav'i Mumbai international site is on the coast.
[37] That means it's built largely on reclaimed land and that's required a lot of preparation.
[38] Now, before we go any further with today's video, we need to stop everything because I have got some very big news that I am finally allowed to share.
[39] Last year, Penguin Random House asked me if I'd like to write a book. I said yes.
[40] I've written a book and here it is.
[41] It is called Mega Builds: 10 Colossal Construction Projects That Will Change World.
[42] Over the last 10 years, I have had a front row seat to some of this planet's most incredible construction projects, and they are all in here.
[43] I've written about them. I've gone deeper than I've ever gone before in any video story or any kind of like long- form documentary.
[44] This is behind the scenes.
[45] It's up close and personal. It meets the teams.
[46] It's the human stories.
[47] It's the engineering in detail.
[48] It's my personal experiences and some of the calamities I've had along the way getting up close with these projects. I have really enjoyed writing this.
[49] Some of my mates have been like, "Oh, nice.
[50] Who uh who ghost wrote that for you?" No one.
[51] I can't afford a fancy ghost writer. Me.
[52] I wrote this. Every single word of this has come from my head into my laptop and then into this book.
[53] All for your reading pleasure.
[54] Guys, I never thought I could write a book, but I have.
[55] And obviously, I'm biased, but I actually kind of think it's quite good.
[56] It is available to pre-order now. The link is below.
[57] Pre-ordering is incredibly important.
[58] Basically, my entire future happiness depends on you pre-ordering this book.
[59] So guys, if you love the B1M, if you love these stories,
[60] if you love learning more about construction in a downto-earth way that's easy to understand and can be read by anyone, go and pre-order my book, Mega Builds, today.
[61] Before any work could start on the foundations back in 2018, three key hurdles had to be tackled, and each of them was pretty massive.
# A challenging site

[62] We Hill, Swampland, and Ol River.
[63] Let's start here.
[64] Right in the middle of the site for the new airport, you'd find this all hill. It's 92 m of solid rock.
[65] Obviously, having a hill in the middle of your concourse isn't exactly ideal.
[66] So, that had to be completely flattened before any building could take place.
[67] Construction crews demolished 62 million cub m of rock through controlled blasting to protect surrounding villages.
[68] But once that was finished, the site looks like this.
[69] So, on to problem number two. What do you do with the blasted rock?
[70] Well, it was repurposed. You see, hundreds of acres of this airport sit on swamp land.
[71] It's covered in mud flats and mangroves, all of which have got to be leveled and stabilized before construction work can begin.
[72] To do that, they had to raise the ground by around 6 m.
[73] And conveniently, they had enormous amounts of rock available from that big old hill they' just blown up.
[74] What's really cool is that these guys blasted the rock at specific explosive power designations to create rock fragments that were the ideal size for land development and reclamation.
[75] The blasted rock was basically dumped into marshy areas, puncturing and displacing the soft clay.
[76] The weight of all that rock then compacted the soil, making it stronger and reducing the amount of intensive treatment that was needed to thicken any weak ground.
[77] But that wasn't the final hurdle. This is River in 2019.
[78] Originally, it cut through the middle of the site, but beyond acting as an interesting water feature, a river through a runway is actually incredibly impractical.
[79] Engineers were left with no choice but to redirect it.
[80] You can see it's been cut at an angle, diverting around the site. And if you're thinking it now looks bigger, then you'd be right.
[81] Navim Mumbai Airport is surrounded by villages whose people have watched this site completely transform.
[82] But within those communities, there's a very real concern about flooding.
[83] You see, swamp and wetlands absorb water through the vegetation and soft soil.
[84] But as we pointed out, large swades of that land have been filled in with a non-absorbent rock, leaving villages wondering where water will run during heavy rainfall. And that's why River has been expanded and deepened.
[85] In some areas, it's grown from 25 m wide to an impressive 200 m wide.
[86] The hope is that the larger area is going to control excess water during floods.
[87] And just before we move on, remember that hill that had to be flattened? Well, that wasn't the only thing that needed taking back down to ground level.
[88] Overhead tension cables had to be rerooed underground to stop airplanes from flying into them.
# A stunning design

[89] Now after 7 years of construction, the first phase of the airport opened on Christmas Day 2025, featuring a control tower, a single runway, a fire station, and terminal 1.
[90] Already, Nav Mumbai is able to serve 20 million passengers a year, and half a million metric tonses of cargo.
[91] But by the end of phase 5 in the 2030s, this airport's going to be unrecognizable.
[92] The site's being enhanced with a second parallel runway, three more terminals, and additional cargo capacity.
[93] The plans will see Navim Mumbai International eventually processing a whopping 90 million passengers and more than 3 million tons of cargo every year.
[94] And it's pretty breathtaking to look at.
[95] Designed by Zaha Hadid Architects, it's modeled to resemble a lotus flower, the national flower of India.
[96] The foundations are being developed using high strength reinforced concrete and pre-cast panels to try and speed up the construction process.
[97] The whole thing is a really impressive accomplishment given how incredibly impractical this site was at the start of the project.
[98] At the front, 12 columns shaped like unfolding petals diffuse light into the terminal as part of a striking two-tier system.
[99] 17 giant columns are then hidden behind them to take the incredible weights of the 370 meter canopy roof.
[100] That curved roof is created using a steel framework supported by a network of steel girders and cladding. Each section acts like a petal formed using large span rectangular steel trusses.
[101] Those trusses are able to carry a massive amount of weight and the result is the ability to reduce the number of columns inside the building.
[102] The goal was to create a beautiful open space with natural light flooding in through the skylights.
[103] And I think it's fair to say mission accomplished.
[104] But those holes in the roof are about a lot more than just giving passengers something nice to look at.
[105] They actually catch and channel monsoon rainwater and help reduce wind resistance.
[106] Altogether, they're incredibly practical.
[107] And actually, I just want to touch on the site location one more time because sure, we've already shown you how far this is from the city.
# Access problems

[108] And yes, moving away from the hustle and bustle means you have more room to play with.
[109] That's understandable. But what makes less sense is the very limited travel infrastructure that now leads to this open and active airport.
[110] A new road network has been constructed, but for the time being, there's no rail access.
[111] There are reports that the mobile connectivity in the area is pretty poor, so communicating with app-based transport systems is difficult and the taxi system is facing delays.
[112] Now there are plans for a new metro line between the old airport and the new Navi Mumbai International, but that's not going to be ready for a number of years.
[113] The one silver lining is the impressive Trans Harbor link, the country's longest sea bridge, which opened in 2024 and connects Mumbai over to Nav'i Mumbai.
[114] But the journey to the new airport by car can take up to 3 hours from some of the suburbs.
[115] And that's the last thing you need when you're about to hop on a longhaul flight.
[116] Now, Navi Mumbai isn't the first airport to face teething issues after opening and it absolutely will not be the last.
[117] But I can't help feeling that after Mumbai waited so long for a new airport, decades for this new airport to happen.
[118] The execution of this project just feels a little bit rushed.
[119] The search for a site led them to somewhere that was covered in swampland with a hill and a river flowing through it.
[120] And now the airport's opened, but without any rail access.
[121] [snorts] And let's be clear, we're still in phase one of this project.
[122] Navim Mumbai International has an incredibly exciting future. To me, it looks a lot like one of the world's fastest growing aviation economies could be about to reach new heights.
[123] Don't forget that we're raising awareness of construction's mental health crisis and supporting charities in this space through our get construction initiative.
[124] You can learn more and find links to supports over at getconstructionalking.org.
[125] And as always guys, if you enjoyed this video and you want to get more from the definitive video channel for construction, make sure you're subscribed to the B1M.