[1] Take a look at this photo of the Arabian
[2] desert and you'll see that one of the
[3] most ambitious construction projects in
[4] history is on.
[5] A 200 m wide trench runs from the Hijaz
[6] Mountains to the Gulf of Akoba. Not only
[7] that, but take a look at this. The first
[8] portion of what will be the biggest set
[9] of foundations ever built.
[10] And now that concrete has set, the first
[11] vertical structures are about to emerge.
[12] In other words, the thing that everyone
[13] said would never be built, could never
[14] be built, is actually being built. Or is
[15] it?
[16] >> I believe he said, "We're going to start
[17] going vertical hopefully at the end of
[18] this year." Generally, in real estate,
[19] hope is not a strategy
[20] >> because for every sign of progress,
[21] there's budget issues
[22] >> winding to a halt.
[23] >> Saudi Arabia has asked consulting firms
[24] to conduct a strategic review of the
[25] line. There are even rumors swirling
[26] that the whole thing has been cancelled.
[27] But what do we actually know? 2026 is
[28] going to be make or break for the line.
[29] This is the year when deadlines need to
[30] be met and when progress is going to be
[31] measured in height, not hype. Because
[32] regardless of what you think of this
[33] project, this idea even realistic.
[34] >> That is absolutely insane.
[35] >> There's a country whose future depends
[36] on it and a leader who staked his entire
[37] reputation on it. they say can be done.
[38] They can't keep saying that and we can't
[39] keep proving them wrong.
[40] So, will it ever be built? Let's find
[41] out.
[42] So, in case you've been living under a
[43] rock, this is the line. Saudi Arabia's
[44] plan for a massive linear city. When or
[45] if it's complete, it'll form the capital
[46] of Neome. A vast new region in the
[47] country's northwest dreamed up by this
[48] guy, Crown Prince Muhammad bin Salman.
[49] It forms part of his vision 2030, an
[50] ambitious plan to wean the country off
[51] its oil dependency by, you guessed it,
[52] 2030.
[53] Now, the numbers behind the line are
[54] staggering. It's going to be 200 m wide
[55] by 500 m tall and it will run for 170 km
[56] across the desert. Now, I don't know
[57] about you, but I can't even begin to get
[58] my head around something that big. So,
[59] I'm not even trying. I'm building my own
[60] little Lego model of the line using
[61] little Lego bricks, only two
[62] bricks high. The model I'm building here
[63] is 0.03%
[64] the size of the actual line. And to give
[65] you a sense of that scale, this would be
[66] the Empire State Building. You can see
[67] the line would absolutely dwarf it in
[68] height, but just look how far it
[69] stretches.
[70] So, the burning question that I and much
[71] of the rest of the world has is how the
[72] hell do you build something like this?
[73] Let's start with the basics.
[74] The line crosses lots of wildly varying
[75] terrain. Hard mountain rock, soft open
[76] desert, and salty coastal plains. To
[77] build anything across such a varied
[78] landscape, you first need a uniform,
[79] stable footing. And that's where the
[80] foundations come in. Say I want to build
[81] a skyscraper, but the ground I'm trying
[82] to build my skyscraper on is rubbish.
[83] Now, this bean bag is to represent
[84] something called cturnary deposits,
[85] which is basically a really fancy way of
[86] saying loosely deposited material that
[87] hasn't been compacted and is pretty
[88] terrible for putting any kind of weight
[89] through. This is what you're going to
[90] find under much of the sight of the
[91] light. However, below that down here
[92] through all this material
[93] is bedrock, and that's a great surface
[94] for putting a building on. How do I get
[95] down there? Well, I have to create
[96] something called a piled raft
[97] foundation, which looks a little bit
[98] like this.
[99] So, I get a nice solid concrete
[100] slab on top here at ground level. And
[101] then the weight of my building gets
[102] carried down, transferred through all
[103] this terrible material here. There's no
[104] weight going on it. Instead, the
[105] weight's being pushed down through the
[106] piles down here into that solid bedrock.
[107] What I'm left with here is an absolutely
[108] outstanding surface
[109] for building a skyscraper on.
[110] Okay, that probably makes it sound
[111] pretty simple, but spoiler alert, it's
[112] most definitely not. Designing
[113] foundations for any building, let alone
[114] one of this size, takes a ton of
[115] calculation. And for that, you need some
[116] serious muscle, which is where the AMD
[117] Threader Pro 9000WX series of
[118] processors comes in. Now, with a name
[119] like Thread Ripper, it's no surprise
[120] that this is one of the go-to chips in
[121] the world of construction. Joking aside,
[122] the chip is a cornerstone of the
[123] architecture, engineering, and
[124] construction industries because it's
[125] built for intense multifunctional
[126] workflows. Thread Ripper Pro packs up to
[127] 96 cores, way more than a standard
[128] high-end desktop, and it combines that
[129] with a massive L3 cache, which gives it
[130] near instant access to huge data sets,
[131] perfect for simulation, rendering, and
[132] modeling. In other words, it's created
[133] for the people who design the building,
[134] those who construct the building, and
[135] the people who create those super slick
[136] renders that we all love drooling over.
[137] But we can't mention processing power in
[138] 2025 without talking about AI. Thread
[139] Ripper Pro includes built-in support for
[140] generative AI workloads, large language
[141] models, diffusion models, you name it.
[142] Whether you're developing AI tools or
[143] designing with them, this chip gives you
[144] the compute and memory headroom to keep
[145] up. But don't just take my word
[146] for it. Check out the Thread for Pro
[147] 9000WX series at the link below. You'll
[148] be helping us out and upgrading to the
[149] industry's highest standard. Now, let's
[150] get back to those foundations.
[151] The number of piles you need and the
[152] depth they go to varies massively
[153] depending on the size of what you're
[154] building and the soil underneath it. The
[155] Empire State Building has 55 piles
[156] dropping down 16 m into the Manhattan
[157] bedrock. The Burj Khalifa, the world's
[158] tallest building, has 194 piles sunk 43
[159] m into the Earth. But the work currently
[160] underway on the line dwarfs anything
[161] ever seen before. Phase 1 has seen over
[162] 16,000 piles driven up to 70 m deep into
[163] the Saudi sand. That's nearly 1,000 km
[164] of drilling using up to 3.5 million cub
[165] m of concrete. On top of that, an 8 m
[166] thick raft will form the basis for
[167] everything else that this colossal
[168] project promises. To pull it off, an
[169] automated factory is churning out tens
[170] of thousands of 32 m long rebar cages to
[171] reinforce each pile. Meanwhile, drilling
[172] rigs are using GPS to precisely bore the
[173] holes that these rebar cages are going
[174] to be dropped into. A biodegradable
[175] liquid is pumped into the holes to stop
[176] them from collapsing before concrete can
[177] then be poured in.
[178] But it's not just soft earth that
[179] engineers have to grapple with. Being so
[180] close to the sea, this stretch also
[181] needs protecting from the highly saline
[182] groundwater. Left untreated, it could
[183] rust the steel cages over time and
[184] corrode the concrete piles. Now, to
[185] solve this, the world's largest
[186] dewatering system has been created. 500
[187] wells were drilled along this stretch of
[188] the line. each equipped with a water
[189] pump at its bottom. Water is pumped out
[190] at a rate of 90,000 cubic meters an hour
[191] or towards a settlement pond where the
[192] quality of the liquid is checked. From
[193] there, the water is filtered and pumped
[194] out to sea in a series of discharge
[195] pipes.
[196] Work on the foundations for phase 1 is
[197] nearly complete, which means the project
[198] is about to enter its next milestone,
[199] going vertical.
[200] On a typical skyscraper, that means
[201] building the core. If you ever walked
[202] past a construction site, you'll
[203] probably have seen these going up.
[204] They're not that attractive, but they're
[205] critical to how a skyscraper works. You
[206] see, it's essentially the backbone of
[207] the building, and it's formed by pouring
[208] concrete into a mold that gets pushed up
[209] by hydraulic jacks. But with the line,
[210] there's a twist. And to explain that, I
[211] am once again resorting to Lego. So,
[212] don't forget that the line is a city.
[213] It's a framework. It's not a single
[214] building. So it doesn't have one single
[215] core that stretches for 170 km inside
[216] it. Instead, it's made up of thousands
[217] of cores, each built individually just
[218] like any other core. But crucially,
[219] these support the yellow decks you can
[220] see here, which are going to be the
[221] primary decks of the structure. They're
[222] like the kind of the main streets, the
[223] main avenues, and the cores are going to
[224] be the cross streets. It's just like the
[225] Manhattan grid except imagine it folded
[226] up and stacked vertically. It's here
[227] within this framework where the city is
[228] going to really come to life. You'll
[229] find schools, hospitals, homes,
[230] transport infrastructure, everything you
[231] need to make a city function. This is
[232] what's currently under construction. Two
[233] rows of 500 meter towers. Phase one will
[234] see 4.8 8 million tons of steel
[235] outrigger beams hoisted up to support
[236] the five decks running through each.
[237] Usually on skyscrapers, the steel work
[238] and cladding will start to be added
[239] before you get to this stage. They
[240] basically follow the core up the
[241] building, which is why 2026 is so
[242] exciting because things should really
[243] start to take shape and we should start
[244] to see some fast progress.
[245] That is the billiondoll sorry I mean
[246] trillion dollar question. Let's start by
[247] talking about concrete. Now pouring
[248] concrete at scale is incredibly complex.
[249] Pour it too slowly and it'll set
[250] unevenly. But pour it too fast and the
[251] ingredients can split. Get the mixture
[252] too wet and your concrete's going to be
[253] brittle. Too dry and it'll end up like
[254] Swiss cheese. Basically, it relies on
[255] total consistency for long periods of
[256] time. Now, millions of tons of concrete
[257] have already been poured, which is a
[258] pretty solid track record. But that's
[259] here on the coast with access to supply
[260] lines. This city still has a very long
[261] way to go up into a vast hintterland
[262] with no access to local materials and a
[263] near total lack of one very key
[264] ingredient,
[265] water. But there's a plan. It all begins
[266] here at the Oxigon, another of NEM's
[267] mega projects where a massive
[268] desalination plant is going to pump
[269] billions of lers of seawater to
[270] reservoirs dotted along the length of
[271] the city. They'll feed a 190 million US
[272] network of concrete factories capable of
[273] producing 20,000 cub m of concrete every
[274] day. But there's a catch. As it stands,
[275] none of this currently exists. Work on
[276] oxygen only began in mid 2025. Those
[277] vast concrete plants are still a very
[278] long way off and concrete's currently
[279] being produced locally with water
[280] shipped in by tankers, which is by no
[281] means a scalable solution. In fact, yet
[282] again, there have recently been
[283] unconfirmed reports that the
[284] desalination plant has been quietly
[285] scrapped. I'm not just splitting hairs
[286] here. The line has got some very
[287] ambitious targets to meet in less than 9
[288] years time. The Neome Stadium is set to
[289] be suspended 350 m up in the air inside
[290] the line and is set to host games at the
[291] 2034 FIFA World Cup. Games that people
[292] are going to be buying tickets for. And
[293] to be honest, for that to be credible by
[294] this stage, I'd expect to see a lot more
[295] evidence of scalable activity. Instead,
[296] what it looks like as I stand here at
[297] the end of 2025 is a project that's
[298] trying to build something,
[299] anything, just to gain a bit of momentum
[300] and prove people wrong.
[301] So, what are they actually building?
[302] What is this phase one we keep
[303] mentioning? Well, when you saw this and
[304] this massive trench in the desert, what
[305] did you think was going to be built?
[306] Maybe the whole thing or maybe half or
[307] at least a quarter. Well, no. Despite
[308] building that enormous 170 km long
[309] cutting through the desert, they're
[310] actually only building this phase 1, a
[311] mere 2.4 km of the line. Now, don't get
[312] me wrong, it's still an absolutely
[313] musive building in its own right, but it
[314] accounts for less than one and a half%
[315] of the entire line structure. You might
[316] be feeling a little bit short changed by
[317] that. I know I certainly am. But there
[318] is a bit of strategy here. You see, the
[319] Neome team are using phase 1 to
[320] construct some of this city's biggest
[321] and most spectacular
[322] anchor assets. An anchor asset is
[323] something that once it is completed
[324] attracts investment and development
[325] around that area. A really great example
[326] would be the Highline in Manhattan,
[327] right? It was this elevated sort of
[328] derelict abandoned rail tracks and it
[329] was revitalized and turned into a public
[330] park. And because of that project, now
[331] that area around the Highline has become
[332] one of the most expensive and coveted
[333] areas in Manhattan.
[334] >> The whole structure is divided into 800
[335] m long modules. Think of these as being
[336] like the neighborhoods or city blocks of
[337] the line. Phase one is going to see
[338] three of these built near the western
[339] end of the site containing some of the
[340] city's most spectacular features.
[341] There's going to be a man-made marina
[342] capable of hosting the world's biggest
[343] cruise ships, the 46,000 capacity neon
[344] stadium, and hanging below a vast
[345] chandelier welcoming people into this
[346] giant structure. What Neon is trying to
[347] do here is basically say we're going to
[348] fund and build a collection of anchor
[349] assets around which sort of the the next
[350] phase will organically take place. That
[351] is the that is the that is the stated
[352] goal here.
[353] >> Now in many ways that makes a lot of
[354] sense. It's a sophisticated strategy
[355] based on industry-wide standards. Where
[356] it doesn't make sense is that this is a
[357] 170 km long city in the desert.
[358] The line is supposed to be a
[359] revolutionary city that tears up the
[360] rule book in the most audacious way
[361] possible and changes the way we think
[362] about our cities forever. For an
[363] ambitious leader with unchecked power,
[364] it's exactly the type of project you
[365] take on to capture the world's
[366] imagination. But for everyone else, it's
[367] a huge risk.
[368] >> We like to say that development is a
[369] dollars and cents game or in this case a
[370] real and halahas game, right? You have
[371] to be so maniacally focused on cost.
[372] However, here this development is part
[373] construction project and part sort of
[374] symbol for what Saudi Arabia can become,
[375] right? And it goes all the way to the
[376] top. The crown prince MBS is the one
[377] that everyone ultimately answers to. So
[378] the question becomes, is he being told
[379] the truth? Is he being told exactly what
[380] he needs to know? Is there leadership
[381] strong enough on Neome to push back on,
[382] let's say, some of the Prince's more
[383] fantastical visions? Because he may go
[384] in and say, "Oh, I actually want this to
[385] curve this way, or I want this to kind
[386] of jump over this thing." And each of
[387] those ideas in his head can turn into
[388] billions of dollars of cost overruns and
[389] months or even years of delays, right?
[390] And that doesn't really work well for
[391] large scale development. Ever since the
[392] line was announced, it's faced intense
[393] criticism around its alleged human cost.
[394] >> Homes, schools, hospitals wiped off the
[395] map.
[396] >> There have been allegations of using
[397] modern-day slavery on sites and orders
[398] to execute tribes people who refuse to
[399] relocate. Allegations that Neom and the
[400] Saudi Arabian government vehemently
[401] deny. Beyond that, it's been very
[402] difficult slash impossible for us or any
[403] journalists to gain real access to the
[404] sites, though relationships with the
[405] press are of course approached very
[406] differently in Saudi Arabia.
[407] But that wall of silence casts a shadow
[408] over the fundamentals of this project.
[409] We reached out to dozens of people
[410] involved in the line for this video, and
[411] almost nobody would talk to us for fear
[412] of reprisals.
[413] The hard truth is that as Saudi Arabia
[414] works to become a more progressive
[415] society, as it works to change its
[416] culture as part of that vision 2030
[417] plan, it's going to have to learn to
[418] master its relationship with the free
[419] press beyond its borders.
[420] >> People who are asking questions about
[421] this project are running into that clash
[422] of cultures in a way. You want to
[423] understand why costs have tripled or why
[424] this has been replaced or why this has
[425] changed or why there's been no updates
[426] on XYZ, but you're still dealing with a
[427] place that is used to not having to
[428] answer to anybody.
[429] Now, if the line does get built, it
[430] won't be the first showpiece city
[431] constructed from scratch. This is
[432] Brazilia. Founded in 1960, it replaced
[433] Rio de Janeiro as Brazil's capital. Just
[434] like the line, it was built in what was
[435] perceived as a remote and inhospitable
[436] location. And even more like the line,
[437] the city's plan was like nothing anyone
[438] has seen before. It was designed in the
[439] 1950s, the jet age, when rapid advances
[440] in aviation, and the jet set represented
[441] all that was cutting edge and
[442] futuristic. Brazilia was meant to
[443] represent a country reborn in the modern
[444] era. So, it was designed like an
[445] airplane. Government buildings are
[446] housed in the cockpits with housing laid
[447] out on the wings and a military district
[448] in the tail. The fuselage forms a
[449] monumental axis uniting the whole city.
[450] Just like Brazilia, the line is kind of
[451] an attempt to create a new
[452] forward-looking symbol for a nation. But
[453] rather than looking to the skies, it
[454] takes inspiration from the pages of
[455] science fiction.
[456] Out of the blue, I got an email from a
[457] Saudi Arabian woman inviting me to talk
[458] with her about giving input into the
[459] aesthetics of the line and she made it
[460] clear that he was very interested in
[461] cyberpunk.
[462] >> Chris Hables Gray is an academic and
[463] author who's written extensively about
[464] cyberpunk and other topics. The line
[465] itself seems to be based in part on
[466] something from Snow Crash, a novel where
[467] the virtual reality world was built
[468] around one long street, an almost
[469] infinite virtual street.
[470] >> Even if you're not familiar with the
[471] term, you're going to have seen the
[472] cyberpunk aesthetic everywhere, from
[473] video games to TV shows and movies like
[474] Bladeunner.
[475] Chris was one of a handful of people
[476] asked to provide background research for
[477] what we now know as the line
[478] >> and I collected a lot of images and
[479] quotes from cyberpunk and related types
[480] of science fiction writing that I
[481] thought they might find useful and so I
[482] was told to look especially at urban
[483] planning urban ideas of cyber punk but
[484] also the related so-called punk genres.
[485] I didn't get to see this but several
[486] people were there. The prince did arrive
[487] at a scheduled demonstration or
[488] exhibition of a lot of these ideas which
[489] they said was mainly just big images. So
[490] then he chose what he liked and uh these
[491] was theoretically incorporated into the
[492] plans for building the whole city.
[493] >> These are some of the images that Chris
[494] shared with Neome. Looking at them, you
[495] can see the clear link with the concept
[496] images released in the early stages of
[497] the line.
[498] If there's one aspect of the line that
[499] does seem straight out of a video game,
[500] it's the distinctive mirror finish that
[501] covers every patch of the building's
[502] exterior. Now, reflective glass isn't
[503] anything new, but it does come with some
[504] disadvantages. The type used on
[505] buildings is made by transferring metal
[506] deposits onto glass through a highly
[507] charged gas, a process known as sputter
[508] coating. It's effective to produce at
[509] scale, but slightly translucent and at
[510] best only reflects around 40% of
[511] light. In other words, it'll never be as
[512] good as this.
[513] This is Mariah. It's a remarkable
[514] building that was constructed in 2019
[515] and is thought to have been a key
[516] inspiration for the line.
[517] At first, it was clad in polished metal
[518] sheets, but these quickly spoiled in the
[519] harsh sandy environment. For a perfect
[520] mirror finish, you need a mirror. But
[521] mirrors are fragile. In the extreme heat
[522] of the desert, the lamination that binds
[523] them can fail, and the silver coating
[524] can peel away from its backing. To
[525] produce something that could withstand
[526] those conditions, an entirely new type
[527] of mirror was developed. Normally, you'd
[528] make a mirror from standard glass. Large
[529] sheets are produced, cut to size, and
[530] then coated with a silver finish. But to
[531] survive the extreme temperatures, this
[532] glass would also have to be heat treated
[533] or tempered. The mirror coating
[534] could only be applied after tempering.
[535] But tempered glass can't be cut. So to
[536] produce the mirrors from Mariah, the
[537] entire production line had to be
[538] reversed. The raw glass was first sent
[539] to be precisely cut to its final size
[540] and was then heat treated before being
[541] returned to its initial factory for the
[542] new mirror coating. Along with a silver
[543] spray, the mirrors were coated with
[544] copper to provide resistance against
[545] intense solar radiation. The result is
[546] what you see today, a surface with over
[547] 90% reflection that can withstand some
[548] of the harshest conditions on Earth.
[549] Talking of the harshest conditions on
[550] Earth, here's a big one. The line will
[551] not be airond conditioned. That's right.
[552] The lack of outdoor cooling was
[553] confirmed in a presentation by the
[554] line's chief development officer earlier
[555] this year. You've got to remember that
[556] this isn't a building, it's a city. So,
[557] inside your home or your office or
[558] wherever, you can have as much air con
[559] as you want. But out on the streets,
[560] you're subject to the ambient
[561] temperature of the desert. And if that's
[562] not bad enough, it could be made worse
[563] by the heat island effect, a phenomenon
[564] where cities absorb and retain heat much
[565] more dramatically than rural areas. In
[566] hot weather, for example, London can be
[567] up to 5° warmer than the surrounding
[568] countryside because of all its heat
[569] absorbing concrete. And in the line,
[570] there's going to be a lot of concrete
[571] and steel and glass. Now, that's pretty
[572] major, but currently all we have to go
[573] on is an assurance that this has all
[574] been thought about and modeled and that
[575] it's all going to be okay. One argument
[576] made is that the mirror finish of the
[577] lines walls is going to reflect so much
[578] light that the city won't actually
[579] absorb that much heat. We're also told
[580] the glass is going to be breathable to
[581] allow air to pass through. Now, whether
[582] that means the vast walls will have
[583] vents in them or there's a brand new
[584] material being invented, we just don't
[585] know. But it doesn't exactly fill you
[586] with optimism.
[587] So, it looks like Life in the Line is
[588] going to be largely lived within
[589] modules. Each one is being designed to
[590] contain all the basic amenities that you
[591] need, accessible within a short walk.
[592] Essentially, it's an extension of the
[593] 15-minute city concept that you see in
[594] places like Copenhagen or Zurich. But
[595] for that to be possible, you've got to
[596] be able to get around without melting.
[597] And if you need to go any further,
[598] you'll need some form of transportation.
[599] But before we can get stuck into how
[600] transport will work, we need to explain
[601] why the line is a line. So apparently
[602] we've all been doing our cities wrong.
[603] This is London, home to about 8.6
[604] million people, just shy of the 9
[605] million people that could ultimately
[606] live in the fully realized line. It
[607] swallows up a sizable chunk of the
[608] southeast of England. Now look what
[609] happens if we compare that to the line.
[610] The point they're making is that this
[611] represents the old way of building
[612] cities. It's grown without any real
[613] plan. It's sprawling and it's
[614] inefficient. Wouldn't it be much neater
[615] if we could take all those people and
[616] house them in this slick,
[617] technologically advanced structure? And
[618] to do that, there's one key thing you
[619] need to get rid of. Cars. Now, cars may
[620] be a large part of why Saudi Arabia is
[621] rich, but this is looking to the future.
[622] Cars take up a lot of space. They crash.
[623] They've got to be parked. They don't
[624] carry many people. What the line's
[625] promising is something much better. Here
[626] at the bottom, you'll find the lines
[627] highspeed railway. It's going to connect
[628] the international airport to the western
[629] tip. Supposedly, it's going to take 20
[630] minutes to make that whole journey,
[631] which will be faster than any train in
[632] existence today. Above all this, the
[633] line's general mass transit, a suburban
[634] style rail system, will be stopping
[635] every 1.5 km. Then distributed between
[636] the lines five primary decks will be a
[637] light rail network stopping every 100 m.
[638] Connecting people between the levels
[639] will be a series of escalators and
[640] lifts. Now this is supposed to be one of
[641] the big selling points of the line that
[642] its shape is a better, more efficient
[643] concept for a city. But is that really
[644] the case? Well, to answer that, take a
[645] look at this. This is Apple Park, Steve
[646] Jobs's last great creation. It's similar
[647] to the line in that it has this simple
[648] structure that houses everything. But
[649] it's different because it's a circle.
[650] That was deliberate because a circle
[651] embodies certain ideas. For one, in a
[652] circle, there's no hierarchy, no top or
[653] bottom, no coveted corner offices, and
[654] the space inside is equally shared by
[655] all. It's also good for getting around,
[656] no pun intended. The furthest anyone has
[657] to travel is a straight line from one
[658] side to another. The maximum distance
[659] you have to travel is the diameter of
[660] the building. Now take a look at
[661] the line. If I want to travel anywhere,
[662] I've only really got two options, head
[663] left or head right. Whereas in a radial
[664] city, I've got every direction to turn
[665] in. So the average journey will always
[666] be shorter. Now, let's take a look again
[667] at those transport options. We're being
[668] told that we're going to be able to get
[669] from here all the way down to the other
[670] end of the line, 170 km away, in just 20
[671] minutes.
[672] This is the China Railway CR450
[673] AAF. It's the fastest train in the
[674] world, although it's still currently in
[675] development. It'll have a top speed of
[676] 450 km an hour, meaning that not even
[677] this could travel the line in 20
[678] minutes. And that's without allowing any
[679] time for speeding up or slowing down.
[680] Plus, it'll only have two stations,
[681] meaning it's not much use for people
[682] that live in the middle of the city. It
[683] means that for those other services,
[684] you're stuck using a suburban train that
[685] stops every 1.5 km or roughly every
[686] mile. How efficient is that?
[687] So, where are we? We started this video
[688] by saying the line and the wider project
[689] NEOM were part of vision 2030, a plan to
[690] kind of totally rewire the Saudi economy
[691] by the end of the decade and save the
[692] country from economic ruin. Well, that
[693] clock is ticking and we don't even know
[694] if phase 1 is going to be complete by
[695] then. Just a few months ago, a detailed
[696] investigation by the Financial Times
[697] claimed that top level executives were
[698] privately admitting that this project
[699] was impossible. And that's really the
[700] crux of the whole scheme.
[701] When it was announced in 2021, the line
[702] was so bold in its ambition. It made
[703] headlines around the world. It forced
[704] everyone to debate what our city should
[705] look like. It inspired kids and got them
[706] excited and engaged about the story of
[707] our future. It was so out there that it
[708] was almost confrontational. It dared
[709] people to write it off. And then with
[710] every drone shot showing progress, with
[711] every satellite image, they were
[712] presented like victory laps over those
[713] who had little faith. But we're 5 years
[714] in now and this thing really needs to
[715] start showing some progress. 2026 is
[716] being touted as a big year. Is
[717] the year where things are really going
[718] to start to take shape. But if that
[719] doesn't happen, then all bets are off.
[720] It's tempting to think that, well, if
[721] anyone could build something like this,
[722] it's going to be Saudi Arabia with its
[723] unchecked power and its vast resources,
[724] but as we've seen, it's not just up to
[725] them anymore.
[726] >> Ultimately, it all boils down to money
[727] and and the purse here is controlled by
[728] one of the richest men on the planet.
[729] However, at this point, to fully realize
[730] what MBS wants, it's going to take more
[731] money than that purse has, right? So
[732] it's going to take a lot of buyin from
[733] the private markets, external capital
[734] partners, foreign investors, etc. But
[735] generally, generally speaking, they want
[736] to see a little bit more in terms of
[737] realistic assumptions.
[738] >> Even if it does get built, there's still
[739] the question of livability. Will this be
[740] a functioning city? Will it be a place
[741] people want to live or will they just
[742] visit?
[743] >> What would you see in 10 years time? So
[744] there's a very tiny chance, 10% maybe,
[745] that there'll be some facilities and a
[746] hunk of the line and rich people will go
[747] there to marvel at it and there will
[748] still be promises being made about
[749] further construction and further resorts
[750] and more and more refues might
[751] be built. I think more likely most of it
[752] will be abandoned.
[753] >> There's no question that if this thing
[754] gets built that it'll be one of the
[755] greatest things ever built in human
[756] history. the modern-day equivalent of
[757] the pyramids. But that's a very big if.
[758] This project has its roots in cyberpunk
[759] and the next year is going to be
[760] decisive in determining whether it stays
[761] as just science fiction or becomes
[762] science fact.
[763] This video was sponsored by AMD. Don't
[764] forget you can do yourself a favor by
[765] clicking that link below and checking
[766] out the full Threader Pro lineup. And as
[767] always guys, if you enjoyed this video
[768] and you want to get more from the
[769] definitive video channel for
[770] construction, make sure you subscribe to
[771] the B1N.