[383] fantastical visions? Because he may go
[384] in and say, "Oh, I actually want this to
[385] curve this way, or I want this to kind
[386] of jump over this thing." And each of
[387] those ideas in his head can turn into
[388] billions of dollars of cost overruns and
[389] months or even years of delays, right?

[413] The hard truth is that as Saudi Arabia
[414] works to become a more progressive
[415] society, as it works to change its
[416] culture as part of that vision 2030
[417] plan, it's going to have to learn to
[418] master its relationship with the free
[419] press beyond its borders.

[422] of cultures in a way. You want to
[423] understand why costs have tripled or why
[424] this has been replaced or why this has
[425] changed or why there's been no updates
[426] on XYZ, but you're still dealing with a
[427] place that is used to not having to
[428] answer to anybody.

[433] Rio de Janeiro as Brazil's capital. Just
[434] like the line, it was built in what was
[435] perceived as a remote and inhospitable
[436] location. And even more like the line,
[437] the city's plan was like nothing anyone
[438] has seen before. It was designed in the
[439] 1950s, the jet age, when rapid advances
[440] in aviation, and the jet set represented
[441] all that was cutting edge and
[442] futuristic. Brazilia was meant to

[475] Chris was one of a handful of people
[476] asked to provide background research for
[477] what we now know as the line
[478] >> and I collected a lot of images and
[479] quotes from cyberpunk and related types
[480] of science fiction writing that I
[481] thought they might find useful and so I
[482] was told to look especially at urban
[483] planning urban ideas of cyber punk but
[484] also the related so-called punk genres.

[498] If there's one aspect of the line that
[499] does seem straight out of a video game,
[500] it's the distinctive mirror finish that
[501] covers every patch of the building's
[502] exterior. Now, reflective glass isn't
[503] anything new, but it does come with some
[504] disadvantages. The type used on

[556] this isn't a building, it's a city. So,
[557] inside your home or your office or
[558] wherever, you can have as much air con
[559] as you want. But out on the streets,
[560] you're subject to the ambient
[561] temperature of the desert. And if that's

[643] concept for a city. But is that really
[644] the case? Well, to answer that, take a
[645] look at this. This is Apple Park, Steve
[646] Jobs's last great creation. It's similar

[651] embodies certain ideas. For one, in a
[652] circle, there's no hierarchy, no top or
[653] bottom, no coveted corner offices, and
[654] the space inside is equally shared by
[655] all. It's also good for getting around,
[656] no pun intended. The furthest anyone has
[657] to travel is a straight line from one
[658] side to another. The maximum distance
[659] you have to travel is the diameter of
[660] the building. Now take a look at
[661] the line. If I want to travel anywhere,

[687] So, where are we? We started this video
[688] by saying the line and the wider project
[689] NEOM were part of vision 2030, a plan to
[690] kind of totally rewire the Saudi economy
[691] by the end of the decade and save the
[692] country from economic ruin. Well, that

[705] look like. It inspired kids and got them
[706] excited and engaged about the story of
[707] our future. It was so out there that it
[708] was almost confrontational. It dared

[743] >> What would you see in 10 years time? So
[744] there's a very tiny chance, 10% maybe,
[745] that there'll be some facilities and a
[746] hunk of the line and rich people will go
[747] there to marvel at it and there will
[748] still be promises being made about
[749] further construction and further resorts
[750] and more and more refues might
[751] be built. I think more likely most of it
