[1] Well, what a year that was. 2025 was
[2] huge for construction. We've seen things
[3] go up, things come down, and pretty much
[4] everything happen in between.
[5] It's because thousands of skilled,
[6] hardworking people in this industry get
[7] up every day to shape our world and kind
[8] of make it look easy, but it's not.
[9] Sometimes things can go wrong. And look,
[10] we love talking about what makes this
[11] industry great. So, it's not
[12] that we want to make a big deal out of
[13] it, but it's the end of the year and
[14] everyone loves a big roundup video. So,
[15] here are the 10 biggest construction
[16] disasters of 2025.
[17] First up, you may remember this.
[18] >> It was the dramatic moment in September
[19] when a huge sinkhole tore open a street
[20] in Bangkok.
[21] 40 m beneath the surface, work was
[22] progressing on this, a new extension to
[23] the Bangkok Metro's Purple Line. Here's
[24] the location of the new Vajira Hospital
[25] Station. The problem started when work
[26] connecting the tunnel to the station
[27] hall ruptured the ceiling, causing the
[28] tunnel to collapse. The first clue
[29] something was wrong came early in the
[30] morning when water was seen welling up
[31] on the road. Then, at 7:13 a.m., this
[32] happened.
[33] A massive 50 m deep sinkhole opened up
[34] large enough to swallow the leaning
[35] tower of Pisa. And if that
[36] wasn't bad enough, what was the name of
[37] that station again?
[38] That's right. This is where the sinkhole
[39] opened up. And this is Vajara Hospital,
[40] home to around 30,000 inatients and
[41] 700,000 outpatients every year. The
[42] hospital was immediately evacuated. And
[43] fortunately, there were no casualties.
[44] Work on the tunnel was paused
[45] immediately and is yet to continue.
[46] Now, statistically, most of you watching
[47] this video are American. But still, a
[48] few of you may recognize this. Old
[49] Trafford, home to Manchester United, one
[50] of the greatest football teams in the
[51] world. Or at least they were until their
[52] legendary manager retired in 2013. And
[53] they've kind of been rubbish ever since.
[54] So, like any club would do when their
[55] team is underperforming, they decided to
[56] build a huge brand new multi-million
[57] dollar stadium. Britain's most famous
[58] football club turned to Britain's most
[59] famous architect and the coolest guy
[60] you've ever seen in a purple suit,
[61] Norman Foster. This is what he came up
[62] with. A vast 100,000 seat stadium
[63] sheltered under a huge umbrella capable
[64] of harvesting sunlight and rainwater. It
[65] was a bold iconic structure and it
[66] looked like a huge circus tent.
[67] It didn't take long for Manunians or
[68] Britain's notoriously savage press to
[69] notice. Add to that the team's recent
[70] performance and the headlines kind of
[71] wrote themselves. In October, just 7
[72] months after plans were announced, it
[73] was quietly confirmed the new stadium
[74] would still be going ahead, but without
[75] the big top.
[76] >> That's it. You people have stood in my
[77] way long enough. I'm going to clone
[78] college.
[79] >> I don't think any of us expected him to
[80] say that.
[81] >> Manchester is nowhere near the Premier
[82] League of scrapping overly ambitious
[83] projects. For that, we need to head to
[84] Saudi Arabia. It's been 3 years since
[85] this country stunned the world by
[86] announcing the Line, a 170 km linear
[87] city in the desert. Then, faster than
[88] you can say unbuildable, a slew of other
[89] so-called giga products were unveiled.
[90] many of them in the country's new region
[91] of Neo. Obviously, everyone said it
[92] could never be done. To which Saudi
[93] Arabia replied,
[94] "Well, not quite, but kind of." Then, as
[95] if that wasn't enough, they even started
[96] building it. There was a huge trench in
[97] the desert, endless piling rigs, oceans
[98] of concrete, and then
[99] >> Saudi Arabia has asked consulting firms
[100] to conduct a strategic review of its
[101] plans for building Neon's development
[102] project, The Line.
[103] >> Yeah, 2025 has been a rough year for
[104] Neome. According to the Financial Times,
[105] work has grown to a halt on almost all
[106] NEOM projects, and the line is, wait for
[107] it, trillions of dollars over budget.
[108] One project that apparently retains full
[109] backing is Traina, a ski resort and
[110] artificial lake in the desert mountains.
[111] It's due to host the 2029 Asian Winter
[112] Games, but maybe hold off buying a
[113] ticket just yet. In October, with less
[114] than 4 years to go before the opening
[115] ceremony, it turned out Neom was still
[116] looking for someone to build it.
[117] You could say that once you're in a
[118] hole, you really should stop digging.
[119] Which brings us very nicely onto our
[120] next project. This is Snowy Hydro, a
[121] vast network of hydroelectric power
[122] plants in Southeast Australia. It's the
[123] biggest engineering project ever
[124] undertaken in the country and an
[125] extraordinary achievement. This is Snowy
[126] 2, a successor project designed to
[127] connect two of the original reservoirs
[128] and create a new power plant. And this
[129] is Florence, the tunnel boring machine
[130] that got stuck just weeks after it
[131] started work. To be fair, things weren't
[132] exactly going well before that happened,
[133] but that contributed to a cost blowout
[134] that saw the budget double to nearly $8
[135] billion US in just 6 months. The sticky
[136] situation was caused by Florence running
[137] into unexpectedly soft ground. As chief
[138] executive Dennis Barnes put it, we just
[139] didn't know it was that soft, clearly.
[140] But that was back in 2024. So, what's
[141] been happening since? Well, after a lot
[142] of effort, Florence eventually got
[143] unstuck and work continued, at least for
[144] a little bit. Things stopped again in
[145] January due to concerns that refuge
[146] chambers hadn't been properly
[147] maintained. Those are the areas that
[148] workers are supposed to take shelter in
[149] if the tunnel starts to collapse. Not
[150] only that, but in October, a line by
[151] line audit was ordered of the entire
[152] project. It's expected to take 9 months
[153] and spoiler alert, it's not going to be
[154] cheap. But that pales in comparison with
[155] a devastating development over in
[156] Ukraine. Earlier this year, we covered
[157] the breathtaking news that Chernobyl
[158] >> 3.6. Not great, not terrible.
[159] >> Yeah, that one had been struck in a
[160] drone attack. The strike happened at
[161] 2:00 a.m. on the 14th of February, and
[162] the remains of the Russian Danto drone
[163] were found in the wreckage. The attack
[164] blasted a 6 m wide hole in the
[165] hermetically sealed shelter covering the
[166] infamous reactor 4. What's worse, the
[167] blast ignited the shield's cladding,
[168] causing a fire to spread internally
[169] throughout the roof. A fire which took
[170] several weeks to extinguish. So,
[171] how worried should we be? Well, it's
[172] important to note there's no immediate
[173] danger, but that could change if parts
[174] or all of the aging reactor
[175] structure inside began to collapse. Work
[176] is underway on designing a patch for the
[177] roof, but in the long run, it looks
[178] unlikely the shield can never be
[179] fully repaired.
[180] >> Hell, listen to me.
[181] >> Earlier this year, Ambassador Kate Wiler
[182] returns to our screens in the very fancy
[183] embassy building, which we featured on
[184] the channel, but she's not the only hot
[185] shot ambassador in town. This may or may
[186] not be the site of the new Chinese
[187] embassy in the United Kingdom. Now, had
[188] all gone to plan, it would probably be
[189] built by now. But this saga has had so
[190] many plot twists that even Ambassador
[191] Wiler wouldn't be able to keep up.
[192] >> Hal, what did you do?
[193] >> Well, I don't know if Hal was involved,
[194] but this is your season 2 roundup of the
[195] diplomat Chinese embassy edition. Back
[196] in 2021, China wanted to build a new
[197] embassy in London, but officials were
[198] concerned about gigantic unmarked
[199] basement on the plants. China absolutely
[200] promised not to use it for spying, but
[201] still planned permission was denied on
[202] security grounds. But then Britain had
[203] an election and the new government was a
[204] lot friendlier to China.
[205] >> Oh friend.
[206] >> So China resubmissed its plans and the
[207] government minister responsible promised
[208] to oversee the application personally.
[209] Everyone assumed she would greenlight
[210] it, but a month before she announced her
[211] decision, she resigned over a scandal.
[212] After that, Britain spy chiefs sounded
[213] the alarm over Chinese spies recruiting
[214] British MPs over LinkedIn, and the
[215] embassy once again looked doomed. Until
[216] in November, it was leaked that Prime
[217] Minister Karma 67
[218] >> was expected to approve the build.
[219] [gasps and sighs]
[220] At the time of this video publishing,
[221] there's not been any official
[222] announcement, and it's unclear if a
[223] deadline for a decision has been set,
[224] which could mean that by the time this
[225] video comes out, the whole thing could
[226] have been approved and built, or not,
[227] maybe. Who knows? What has the price of
[228] fish got to do with Britain's newest
[229] nuclear power station? This is
[230] Hinckley Point C, a vast new facility
[231] capable of churning out 7% of the UK's
[232] electricity needs. Only Britain hasn't
[233] built anything like it in 30 years and
[234] has gotten a little bit rusty. The
[235] bill's been played by labor and
[236] material shortages and disruption caused
[237] by co and Brexit has sent the bill
[238] soaring to 48 billion pounds making it
[239] potentially the most expensive nuclear
[240] power plant in history. Plus, there's an
[241] even bigger issue. Salmon. In November,
[242] a government report discovered the plans
[243] for the site included a 700 million
[244] pound acoustic deterrent aimed at
[245] protecting local marine life. Once
[246] again, the British press had a bit of a
[247] field day, especially when the so-called
[248] fish disco was only estimated to save
[249] one salmon every 12 years. That's a big
[250] go.
[251] Over to Germany now, and with its
[252] engineering prowess and voron dur
[253] technic, it's one country that you'd
[254] expect to have really good
[255] infrastructure, right? Well, [snorts]
[256] wrong. The state of Germany's railways
[257] crashed onto the scene back in 2024
[258] during the Euros. Not a single train has
[259] been on time.
[260] >> But the train won't move. We're hit with
[261] our first delay.
[262] >> German efficiency is very disappointing.
[263] Germany's rail system has been a mess
[264] for a while, but efforts are being made
[265] to upgrade it to something at least
[266] functional. The flagship project is this
[267] Stutgart 21. The plan is simple. Turn
[268] the city's main terminus into a through
[269] station and transform it into a regional
[270] hub. Needless to say, it's not been as
[271] simple as that. One major problem has
[272] been the gradient of the tracks in the
[273] tunnels. The maximum regulations allow
[274] for is 0.25%.
[275] But the tunnels in Stokart are laid to
[276] 1.51%
[277] which means trains could start rolling
[278] away from the platform under their own
[279] momentum. More recently, problems have
[280] emerged with the new signaling system
[281] that's designed to phase out
[282] old-fashioned lights. Details are light,
[283] but a series of risks have emerged and
[284] the whole upgrade is stuck on red. And
[285] in case you were invited to the grand
[286] opening party in 2026, it's
[287] unfortunately been cancelled. While
[288] Germany might be struggling with
[289] engineering, one of America's flagship
[290] rail projects is being held up for a
[291] very different reason. California
[292] highspeed rail has been plagued by
[293] delays and cost blowouts since it broke
[294] ground back in 2015. It turns out that
[295] buying land in one of the most expensive
[296] parts of the country costs quite a bit
[297] of money. Now, President Trump
[298] has never been a fan of this project. He
[299] tried to pull funding during his first
[300] term, and then in July 2025, he tried
[301] again, claiming back over 45 billion US
[302] in federal funding. That's being
[303] challenged in the courts, and a
[304] resolution isn't expected anytime soon.
[305] But it's not the only infrastructure
[306] project in the US that's been strapped
[307] for cash. The record-breaking government
[308] shutdown in October, played havoc with
[309] projects right across the country. The
[310] worst hit was New York's Hudson tunnel
[311] gateway program, easily one of the most
[312] critical tunnel schemes in the entire
[313] country. $18 billion in federal funding,
[314] was frozen, and Donald Trump even
[315] declared he had terminated the project.
[316] Where we go from here is anyone's guess.
[317] We couldn't talk about disastrous rail
[318] projects without also mentioning that
[319] old favorite Britain's highspeed 2. The
[320] country may have invented the railways
[321] 200 years ago, but it's not gone very
[322] well since. Where to start with HS2?
[323] Well, that's partly the problem. The
[324] ill- fated line was meant to link London
[325] with several destinations in the north
[326] of England. So, in 2020, construction
[327] began in London. Now, a cynic would say
[328] that they only started in London because
[329] the project was highly unpopular from
[330] the start and the UK government wouldn't
[331] have to fully commit to building the
[332] entire network and could scrap parts of
[333] it if the route ever got too
[334] controversial. But of course, that would
[335] never happen. Although, that's literally
[336] exactly what happened. Today, HS2 is 335
[337] km shorter, 68 billion pounds more
[338] expensive, and no one really knows when
[339] it's going to be finished. So, what's
[340] new? Well, in October, it was announced
[341] that a 29 km section linking HS2 to the
[342] rest of the mainline network was being
[343] depprioritized, meaning it won't be
[344] finished for another 4 years. But at
[345] this stage, who's even still counting?
[346] So, there you have it. The 10 biggest
[347] construction fails of 2025, and we ran
[348] out of time to talk about Acon's new
[349] city in Sagal, which was officially
[350] scrapped.
[351] Now, if you've had enough Shard and
[352] Freder and want to see some truly
[353] impressive mega projects in 26, don't
[354] worry because we've got your back. Make
[355] sure you subscribe to the B1M to keep
[356] all this great stuff coming into your
[357] feed. Don't forget guys that we're
[358] inspiring the next generation of
[359] builders through our investment into
[360] Brick Borrow, a fantastic LEGO
[361] subscription service. You can learn more
[362] and get started today over at
[363] brickbarrow.com.
[364] And as always guys, if you enjoyed this
[365] video and you want to get more from the
[366] definitive video channel for
[367] construction, make sure you're
[368] subscribed to the B1M.