[94] "Well, not quite, but kind of." Then, as
[95] if that wasn't enough, they even started
[96] building it. There was a huge trench in

[141] been happening since? Well, after a lot
[142] of effort, Florence eventually got
[143] unstuck and work continued, at least for
[144] a little bit. Things stopped again in
[145] January due to concerns that refuge
[146] chambers hadn't been properly
[147] maintained. Those are the areas that
[148] workers are supposed to take shelter in
[149] if the tunnel starts to collapse. Not

[166] infamous reactor 4. What's worse, the
[167] blast ignited the shield's cladding,
[168] causing a fire to spread internally
[169] throughout the roof. A fire which took
[170] several weeks to extinguish. So,
[171] how worried should we be? Well, it's
[172] important to note there's no immediate
[173] danger, but that could change if parts
[174] or all of the aging reactor
[175] structure inside began to collapse. Work

[195] diplomat Chinese embassy edition. Back
[196] in 2021, China wanted to build a new
[197] embassy in London, but officials were
[198] concerned about gigantic unmarked
[199] basement on the plants. China absolutely
[200] promised not to use it for spying, but
[201] still planned permission was denied on
[202] security grounds. But then Britain had

[220] At the time of this video publishing,
[221] there's not been any official
[222] announcement, and it's unclear if a
[223] deadline for a decision has been set,
[224] which could mean that by the time this
[225] video comes out, the whole thing could
[226] have been approved and built, or not,
[227] maybe. Who knows? What has the price of
[228] fish got to do with Britain's newest
[229] nuclear power station? This is

[240] power plant in history. Plus, there's an
[241] even bigger issue. Salmon. In November,
[242] a government report discovered the plans
[243] for the site included a 700 million
[244] pound acoustic deterrent aimed at
[245] protecting local marine life. Once

[263] Germany's rail system has been a mess
[264] for a while, but efforts are being made
[265] to upgrade it to something at least
[266] functional. The flagship project is this
[267] Stutgart 21. The plan is simple. Turn
[268] the city's main terminus into a through
[269] station and transform it into a regional
[270] hub. Needless to say, it's not been as

[275] But the tunnels in Stokart are laid to
[276] 1.51%
[277] which means trains could start rolling
[278] away from the platform under their own
[279] momentum. More recently, problems have
[280] emerged with the new signaling system
[281] that's designed to phase out
[282] old-fashioned lights. Details are light,

[287] unfortunately been cancelled. While
[288] Germany might be struggling with
[289] engineering, one of America's flagship
[290] rail projects is being held up for a
[291] very different reason. California
[292] highspeed rail has been plagued by
[293] delays and cost blowouts since it broke
[294] ground back in 2015. It turns out that
[295] buying land in one of the most expensive
[296] parts of the country costs quite a bit
[297] of money. Now, President Trump
[298] has never been a fan of this project. He
[299] tried to pull funding during his first
[300] term, and then in July 2025, he tried
[301] again, claiming back over 45 billion US
[302] in federal funding. That's being

[305] But it's not the only infrastructure
[306] project in the US that's been strapped
[307] for cash. The record-breaking government
[308] shutdown in October, played havoc with
[309] projects right across the country. The

[319] old favorite Britain's highspeed 2. The
[320] country may have invented the railways
[321] 200 years ago, but it's not gone very
[322] well since. Where to start with HS2?
[323] Well, that's partly the problem. The
[324] ill- fated line was meant to link London
[325] with several destinations in the north
[326] of England. So, in 2020, construction
[327] began in London. Now, a cynic would say
[328] that they only started in London because
[329] the project was highly unpopular from
[330] the start and the UK government wouldn't
[331] have to fully commit to building the
[332] entire network and could scrap parts of
[333] it if the route ever got too
[334] controversial. But of course, that would
[335] never happen. Although, that's literally
