[106] that green light flickered on in 2023
[107] when local authorities approved a new
[108] master plan for the site. Progress has
[109] been accelerating ever since then. The
[110] palms are taking shape and a mini city
[111] is steadily being built on top of them
[112] and some of these homes will be
[113] impressive. We're talking glasswalled
[114] pen houses and sprawling waterfront
[115] villas. It's honestly hard not to be a

[139] and sections, create sleek mood boards
[140] for your designs, or even make a bespoke
[141] material palette for a luxury penthouse
[142] on a new palm island. All of this while
[143] being able to collaborate with others
[144] instantaneously, so you've got ample
[145] time to focus on what really matters,
[146] like this gorgeous C view I'm going to
[147] have from my kitchen. And speaking of
[148] saving time, Rayon Design has a library
[149] of over 10,000 CAD blocks at scale.

[243] placed layer by layer over the base. A
[244] fleet of barges, tugboats, and dredges
[245] transported these rocks before large
[246] floating cranes lifted and set them into
[247] position. The sloping shape of the
[248] breakwater and the graded rock layers
[249] were designed so that incoming waves
[250] lose energy progressively rather than
[251] just hitting a vertical face that
[252] reduces scour around the base of the
[253] breakwater while protecting the
[254] reclaimed land and islands on the
[255] interior. As the rocks were positioned

[327] no longer recovering, but thriving. The
[328] place has established itself as a
[329] neutral parking spot for international
[330] wealth thanks to no income tax and fast
[331] visas. Dubai is once again seeing
[332] international money flowing from Russia,
[333] China, and Europe, which is in turn
[334] funding vast construction projects. But
