[1:+1+2] Want to know why Dubai is back? Well, look to the sea.
[2:+3+4+5+6+7+8] This is the Palm Jebali, the world's largest palm-shaped island. It'll have 2,000 luxury villas, 80 hotels, a sea village, a yacht club, and a mega mosque. All in all, it's going to more than double Dubai's current coastline.
[3:+9+10+11+12] But if you're experiencing a bit of deja vu right now, then you're not alone because Dubai has actually done this before.
[4:+13+14+15+16] This is the second time they've built the world's largest palm-shaped island. Only this one is bigger and bolder because, after all, it is a sequel.
[5:+16+17+18] The first installment in this franchise was the Palm Jimra back in 2007.
[6:+18+19+20+21+22+23+24+25+26+27] But suddenly, all the cranes on Dubai's skyline froze and construction stopped overnight. Many of Dubai's ambitious mega projects were paused or cancelled altogether thanks to the 2008 global financial crisis. They included plans for a kilometer high skyscraper, a fully rotating Super Tool, and oh so many artificial islands. The 2010s were rough
[7:+28+29+30+31] for the world's glitziest oasis. But the city is now in the midst of a remarkable comeback. Dubai is building mega projects once again. This is Dubai 2.0.
[8:+32+33+34] to but has it learned from the lessons of the past or is it doomed to make the same expensive mistakes?
[9:+35+36+37+38] In the early 1990s, Dubai was on the verge of its first remarkable reinvention. The city was a dusty outpost on the edge of the world.
[10:+38+39] Most people had never heard of it.
[11:+39+40+41+42+43+44+45] But that all changed with the construction of the sail-shaped Burj Alarab, a building so beautiful, it didn't just grab the world's attention, it demanded it. It didn't hurt that it was now also the first seven-star hotel ever constructed.
[12:+46+47] Dubai was now no longer an outpost. It was becoming a center of luxury.
[13:+48+49+50] So, the city built an enormous amount of luxury real estate. And that real estate demanded one thing above all else.
[14:+51] Location, location, location.
[15:+52+53+54+55] But Dubai had a problem. It was limited by 70 km of natural coastline. Now 70 km is a lot of coastline, but not all coastlines are created equal.
[16:+55+56+57+58+-59+60+61+62+63] This strip right here close to the city could fetch the best price. So Dubai created more prime coastline close to the center. All sorts of islands were dreamed up. There was the map of the world where you could live on your own British Isle. There was the universe and there was of course the palms. Each one bigger than the last.
[17:+64+65+66+67] The first palm, Palm Jayra, added 50 km of new coastline to Dubai. It was a phenomenal success and became an instantly recognizable global icon.
[18:+67+68+69+70] And then came 2008. Soaring gas prices, falling home prices, and rising unemployment.
[19:+71] >> Every day they're pounding it.
[20:+72+73+74] >> This is the most significant financial crisis in the postwar period. The stock market is now down 21%.
[21:+75+76+77] >> Life, as most Americans know it, is about to change, in some cases dramatically.
[22:+78+79+80+81+82+-83+84+85] >> The financial crisis spread from America to the rest of the world. Dubai was hit harder and more visibly than any city outside of the West, partly because it depended on money coming in from those locations. All construction work stopped overnight, and some property prices fell by as much as 60%.
[23:+85+86+87+88+89+90+91] Dubai World, an investment company that manages and supervises a whole range of businesses and projects for the Dubai government, asked to delay repayments on $26 billion worth of debt. That triggered panic and many people lost faith in Dubai.
[24:+92+93+94+95] Cut to 2026 and it's a completely different story. Dubai is in the middle of a renaissance and back to doing what it does best, smashing world records.
[25:+96+97+98+99+100] This is the world's tallest hotel, the world's skinniest skyscraper, the world's biggest airport, plus two record-breaking mega tall skyscrapers more than 700 m high.
[26:+100+101+102+103] All of these projects have either been built in the last 2 years or are being built right now.
[27:+103+104+105+106+107+-108+109+110+111+112+113+114+115+116+117] But nothing exemplifies Dubai's returned bombasty more than the greenlighting of the Palm Jebali. And that green light flickered on in 2023 when local authorities approved a new master plan for the site. Progress has been accelerating ever since then. The palms are taking shape and a mini city is steadily being built on top of them and some of these homes will be impressive. We're talking glasswalled pen houses and sprawling waterfront villas. It's honestly hard not to be a little bit jealous when I'm sat here in rainy old London.
[28:+117+118+119+120+121] So, naturally, I've decided to design my very own dream Dubai penthouse. All I need next to help this come true is to become a billionaire. Simple.
[29:+121+122+123+124+125+126+127+128+129+130] Dreaming up my dream home was surprisingly easy thanks to Rayon Design, a fully cloudnative CAD platform made for professional interior designers and architects. It's usually hard to find one software that takes you from concept to finished drawing set, so you end up wasting a lot of time switching between tools. But Rayon Design streamlines the entire process.
[30:+131+132+133+134] You can import industry standard files, create accurate technical drawings, and then put them in a presentation to be client ready, all in this one platform.
[31:+135+136+137+138+139+140+141+142+143+144+145+146+147+148+149] No bouncing around between endless applications. Their built-in AI panel means you can quickly generate 3D axonometric views from your floor plans and sections, create sleek mood boards for your designs, or even make a bespoke material palette for a luxury penthouse on a new palm island. All of this while being able to collaborate with others instantaneously, so you've got ample time to focus on what really matters, like this gorgeous C view I'm going to have from my kitchen. And speaking of saving time, Rayon Design has a library of over 10,000 CAD blocks at scale.
[32:+150+151+152+153+154+155] Look, I can drag anything from furniture to stove tops instantly onto my plan. If they still don't have what you want somehow, you can quickly AI generate custom blocks using images or even text prompts.
[33:+155+156+157] You can try Round Design yourself for free using the link in the description.
[34:+157+158+159+160+161] Now, let's get back to the main video because if I'm going to build my dream villa on sand, I want to make sure it's sitting on some pretty sturdy foundations.
[35:+162+163+164+165] So, remind me again, how do you build the world's biggest palm island? How do you make land from scratch? Well, you dredge it.
[36:+165+166+167+168+169+170+171+172] Huge volumes of sand from the Persian Gulf seabed were transported via pipelines and dredger barges to the island's site. There, a technique called rainbowing sprayed the sand in a controlled ark to deposit it precisely where needed to build up the trunk and fronds of the Palm Island.
[37:+172+173+174+175+176] Simply placing sand on top of the seabed isn't enough. The reclaimed ground must support the weight of all the buildings on top.
[38:+176+177+178+179] Think for a moment of a sand castle. It's possible to build a very large, very tall sand castle. We see it all the time.
[39:+179+180+181+182+-183+184+185+186+187+188+189+190+-191+192+193+194+195] As we know, sand is made from many little individual grains. These grains touch each other at thousands of contact points. Together, they form a stable framework, otherwise known as a soil skeleton. Now, when weight is applied to the top of the sand, that weight is transmitted through these contact points from grain to grain. As each of these grains are irregular in shape, they interlock, making movement harder. The roughness creates friction, which in turn also makes movement harder. Water then fills the space between the grains. While it doesn't carry the weight, it can sometimes add temporary strength.
[40:+195+196+197+198] That's how sand castles can get constructed so high. However, in the event of any seismic activity, this all goes to hell.
[41:+199+200+201+202+203+204+205+206+207+208] Strong shaking causes sand grains to lose contact. Poor water pressure increases between the grains, which means the water starts carrying the load instead of the sand, which is not good. The soil loses strength and stiffness, and the ground behaves like thick fluid or quicksand. Our sand castle falls to the ground and any villa or skyscraper on top of it would do the same thing.
[42:+209+210+211+212+213+214+215+-216+217+218] Even without an earthquake, liquefaction can still be a pretty big problem when you're building on reclaimed land. Small movements can cause foundations to settle, which in turn can make buildings tilt or crack. It can buckle roads. It can even break underground service pipes. So, how does the Palm Jabali plan to get around this problem? Well, they kind of created their own earthquake.
[43:+219+220+221+222+223+224+225+226] First, engineers used a method called viro compaction. It's where heavy vibrating probes are inserted down through the loose sand to a depth of about 15 m. The vibration along with injected water rearranges and densifies the sand grains, packing them closer together.
[44:+227+228+229+230+231] Making the sand denser means more grainto-rain contact and friction, both of which create greater stability. The whole island itself is surrounded by a cresant-shaped breakwater system.
[45:+231+232+233+234+235+236+237+238] This protective structure made primarily of sand and rocks is designed to shield the artificial island from strong tides, waves, and seasonal storms. This one in particular is 17 km long and about 200 m wide, making it even larger than the one around Palmyra.
[46:+238+239+240+241+242+243+244+245+246+247+248+249+250+251+252+253+254+255+256+257+258+259+260] Construction began with marine surveying of the seabed to map depths and conditions. Huge rock armor units were brought in, often weighing several tons each. These rocks were placed layer by layer over the base. A fleet of barges, tugboats, and dredges transported these rocks before large floating cranes lifted and set them into position. The sloping shape of the breakwater and the graded rock layers were designed so that incoming waves lose energy progressively rather than just hitting a vertical face that reduces scour around the base of the breakwater while protecting the reclaimed land and islands on the interior. As the rocks were positioned by the cranes, they were verified by GPS and divers under the water which gave them incredible precision. In fact, a lot of the construction of the Palm Jebali used GPS technology.
[47:+261+262+263+264] Because the entire island was created offshore with no physical reference points like roads or fixed land boundaries, GPS was actually essential.
[48:+265+266+267+268+269+270+271] Engineers converted the palm design into digital coordinates. Those coordinates were then fed into GPS systems which were then relayed to the dredges and the dredges poured their sand according to the digital model. It was almost like 3D printing an entire island.
[49:+272+273+274+275+276] With the land pulled up from the sea, construction could then begin on everything else. Roads, utilities, sewage systems, villas, and of course, hotels. They're building a small city
[50:+276+277+278+279+280+281+282+283] on top of this island, and that's no easy feat. Dubai has outdone itself and successfully constructed a Palm Island that's more than twice as big as their last record-breaking Palm Island. The first phase of villas have also completely sold out.
[51:+283+284+285+286+287+288] So, how did we get here from 2008? How was Dubai not only able to recover but also start building massive mega projects once again? Now, bear with us because things are going to get a little bit complicated.
[52:+289+290+291+292+293+294] Before 2008, Dubai had a property bubble that was driven by cheap global credit. The sudden freeze of liquidity after Lehman collapsed meant that people from overseas were no longer buying real estate. So Abu Dhabi bailed them out.
[53:+295+296+297] Abu Dhabi is here. It's the other famous emirates in the UAE and it's the one with all the cash. Why is that?
[54:+297+298+299+300+301+-302+303+304+305+306+307+308+309+310] It's because Abu Dhabi holds 95% of all the UAE's oil and 90% of its gas. Dubai, on the other hand, has smaller, more depleted oil reserves that only contribute a fraction to the economy. In December of 2009, the government of Abu Dhabi provided $10 billion to the Dubai Financial Support Fund. The money was used to meet some of the immediate debt obligations of Dubai world as well as some other obligations while longerterm debt restructuring was negotiated.
[55:+311+312] That's the moment that changed Dubai forever.
[56:+312+313+314+-315+316+317+-318+319+320+-321+322+323+324] It set new rules for the UAE. While Dubai could innovate, it was Abu Dhabi that settled the balance sheet. The impact was evident almost immediately. Most famously, the Burj Dubai was renamed the Burj Khalifa after Abu Dhabi's ruler. Now, Dubai had phased developments instead of simultaneous mega projects, and there was much stricter real estate regulation to grapple with. There wasn't an abandonment of Dubai's crazy build mentality. It was a refinement.
[57:+324+325+326] In a way, 2008 helped the city to mature and grow up.
[58:+326+327+328+329+330+331+332+-333+334+335+336+337+338+339+340+-341+342+343+344+345+346+347+348] And it paid off. Dubai is now no longer recovering, but thriving. The place has established itself as a neutral parking spot for international wealth thanks to no income tax and fast visas. Dubai is once again seeing international money flowing from Russia, China, and Europe, which is in turn funding vast construction projects. But this time, it's accompanied by a huge population boom. While many new buildings are still essentially safety deposit boxes in the sky, there are other buildings actually being built for people to live and work in too. The big question is, will any of this last? And to be honest, it's a question that only time can answer. By all accounts, the foundations of this new Dubai 2.0 do seem to be constructed on pretty sturdy ground. It's almost like they've reinforced the sand beneath their feet, if you will.
[59:+348+349+350+351+352+353+354+355+356] As for the islands, well, they've been constructed with rising seas and stronger storms in mind. Most sea level rise projections range from 0.3 to a meter. They've built a buffer for this combined with the cresant-shaped breakwater system. Ironically, this island might last longer than most coastal cities.
[60:+357+358+359] And that seems to go for the rest of the city now as well. Dubai is being built to last.
[61:+360+361+362+363+364+365] This video was sponsored by Rayon Design. Don't forget that if you're a professional interior designer or an architect, you're going to want to check out Rayon Design for yourself for free at the link in the description.
[62:+365+366+367+368+369+370] And as always guys, if you enjoyed this video and you want to get more from the definitive video channel for construction, make sure you're subscribed to the B1M