[18] the Palm Jimra back in 2007. But
[19] suddenly, all the cranes on Dubai's
[20] skyline froze and construction stopped
[21] overnight. Many of Dubai's ambitious
[22] mega projects were paused or cancelled
[23] altogether thanks to the 2008 global
[24] financial crisis. They included plans
[25] for a kilometer high skyscraper, a fully
[26] rotating Super Tool, and oh so many
[27] artificial islands. The 2010s were rough

[55] coastlines are created equal. This strip
[56] right here close to the city could fetch
[57] the best price. So Dubai created more
[58] prime coastline close to the center. All
[59] sorts of islands were dreamed up. There
[60] was the map of the world where you could
[61] live on your own British Isle. There was
[62] the universe and there was of course the
[63] palms. Each one bigger than the last.

[78] >> The financial crisis spread from America
[79] to the rest of the world. Dubai was hit
[80] harder and more visibly than any city
[81] outside of the West, partly because it
[82] depended on money coming in from those
[83] locations. All construction work stopped
[84] overnight, and some property prices fell
[85] by as much as 60%. Dubai World, an

[103] now. But nothing exemplifies Dubai's
[104] returned bombasty more than the
[105] greenlighting of the Palm Jebali. And
[106] that green light flickered on in 2023
[107] when local authorities approved a new
[108] master plan for the site. Progress has
[109] been accelerating ever since then. The
[110] palms are taking shape and a mini city
[111] is steadily being built on top of them
[112] and some of these homes will be
[113] impressive. We're talking glasswalled
[114] pen houses and sprawling waterfront
[115] villas. It's honestly hard not to be a
[116] little bit jealous when I'm sat here in
[117] rainy old London. So, naturally, I've

[121] billionaire. Simple. Dreaming up my
[122] dream home was surprisingly easy thanks
[123] to Rayon Design, a fully cloudnative CAD
[124] platform made for professional interior
[125] designers and architects. It's usually
[126] hard to find one software that takes you
[127] from concept to finished drawing set, so
[128] you end up wasting a lot of time
[129] switching between tools. But Rayon
[130] Design streamlines the entire process.

[135] No bouncing around between endless
[136] applications. Their built-in AI panel
[137] means you can quickly generate 3D
[138] axonometric views from your floor plans
[139] and sections, create sleek mood boards
[140] for your designs, or even make a bespoke
[141] material palette for a luxury penthouse
[142] on a new palm island. All of this while
[143] being able to collaborate with others
[144] instantaneously, so you've got ample
[145] time to focus on what really matters,
[146] like this gorgeous C view I'm going to
[147] have from my kitchen. And speaking of
[148] saving time, Rayon Design has a library
[149] of over 10,000 CAD blocks at scale.

[165] dredge it. Huge volumes of sand from the
[166] Persian Gulf seabed were transported via
[167] pipelines and dredger barges to the
[168] island's site. There, a technique called
[169] rainbowing sprayed the sand in a
[170] controlled ark to deposit it precisely
[171] where needed to build up the trunk and
[172] fronds of the Palm Island. Simply

[179] all the time. As we know, sand is made
[180] from many little individual grains.
[181] These grains touch each other at
[182] thousands of contact points. Together,
[183] they form a stable framework, otherwise
[184] known as a soil skeleton. Now, when
[185] weight is applied to the top of the
[186] sand, that weight is transmitted through
[187] these contact points from grain to
[188] grain. As each of these grains are
[189] irregular in shape, they interlock,
[190] making movement harder. The roughness
[191] creates friction, which in turn also
[192] makes movement harder. Water then fills
[193] the space between the grains. While it
[194] doesn't carry the weight, it can
[195] sometimes add temporary strength. That's

[199] Strong shaking causes sand grains to
[200] lose contact. Poor water pressure
[201] increases between the grains, which
[202] means the water starts carrying the load
[203] instead of the sand, which is not good.
[204] The soil loses strength and stiffness,
[205] and the ground behaves like thick fluid
[206] or quicksand. Our sand castle falls to
[207] the ground and any villa or skyscraper
[208] on top of it would do the same thing.
[209] Even without an earthquake, liquefaction
[210] can still be a pretty big problem when
[211] you're building on reclaimed land. Small
[212] movements can cause foundations to
[213] settle, which in turn can make buildings
[214] tilt or crack. It can buckle roads. It
[215] can even break underground service
[216] pipes. So, how does the Palm Jabali plan
[217] to get around this problem? Well, they
[218] kind of created their own earthquake.
[219] First,
[220] engineers used a method called viro
[221] compaction. It's where heavy vibrating
[222] probes are inserted down through the
[223] loose sand to a depth of about 15 m. The
[224] vibration along with injected water
[225] rearranges and densifies the sand
[226] grains, packing them closer together.

[231] cresant-shaped breakwater system. This
[232] protective structure made primarily of
[233] sand and rocks is designed to shield the
[234] artificial island from strong tides,
[235] waves, and seasonal storms. This one in
[236] particular is 17 km long and about 200 m
[237] wide, making it even larger than the one
[238] around Palmyra. Construction began with
[239] marine surveying of the seabed to map
[240] depths and conditions. Huge rock armor
[241] units were brought in, often weighing
[242] several tons each. These rocks were
[243] placed layer by layer over the base. A
[244] fleet of barges, tugboats, and dredges
[245] transported these rocks before large
[246] floating cranes lifted and set them into
[247] position. The sloping shape of the
[248] breakwater and the graded rock layers
[249] were designed so that incoming waves
[250] lose energy progressively rather than
[251] just hitting a vertical face that
[252] reduces scour around the base of the
[253] breakwater while protecting the
[254] reclaimed land and islands on the
[255] interior. As the rocks were positioned
[256] by the cranes, they were verified by GPS
[257] and divers under the water which gave
[258] them incredible precision. In fact, a
[259] lot of the construction of the Palm
[260] Jebali used GPS technology.

[265] Engineers converted the palm design into
[266] digital coordinates. Those coordinates
[267] were then fed into GPS systems which
[268] were then relayed to the dredges and the
[269] dredges poured their sand according to
[270] the digital model. It was almost like 3D
[271] printing an entire island.

[276] hotels. They're building a small city on
[277] top of this island, and that's no easy
[278] feat. Dubai has outdone itself and
[279] successfully constructed a Palm Island
[280] that's more than twice as big as their
[281] last record-breaking Palm Island. The
[282] first phase of villas have also
[283] completely sold out. So, how did we get

[297] with all the cash. Why is that? It's
[298] because Abu Dhabi holds 95% of all the
[299] UAE's oil and 90% of its gas. Dubai, on
[300] the other hand, has smaller, more
[301] depleted oil reserves that only
[302] contribute a fraction to the
[303] economy. In December of 2009, the
[304] government of Abu Dhabi provided $10
[305] billion to the Dubai Financial
[306] Support Fund. The money was used to meet
[307] some of the immediate debt obligations
[308] of Dubai world as well as some other
[309] obligations while longerterm debt
[310] restructuring was negotiated.

[312] forever. It set new rules for the UAE.
[313] While Dubai could innovate, it was Abu
[314] Dhabi that settled the balance
[315] sheet. The impact was evident almost
[316] immediately. Most famously, the Burj
[317] Dubai was renamed the Burj Khalifa after
[318] Abu Dhabi's ruler. Now, Dubai
[319] had phased developments instead of
[320] simultaneous mega projects, and there
[321] was much stricter real estate regulation
[322] to grapple with. There wasn't an
[323] abandonment of Dubai's crazy build
[324] mentality. It was a refinement. In a

[326] grow up. And it paid off. Dubai is now
[327] no longer recovering, but thriving. The
[328] place has established itself as a
[329] neutral parking spot for international
[330] wealth thanks to no income tax and fast
[331] visas. Dubai is once again seeing
[332] international money flowing from Russia,
[333] China, and Europe, which is in turn
[334] funding vast construction projects. But
[335] this time, it's accompanied by a huge
[336] population boom. While many new
[337] buildings are still essentially safety
[338] deposit boxes in the sky, there are
[339] other buildings actually being built for
[340] people to live and work in too. The big
[341] question is, will any of this last? And
[342] to be honest, it's a question that only
[343] time can answer. By all accounts, the
[344] foundations of this new Dubai 2.0 do
[345] seem to be constructed on pretty
[346] sturdy ground. It's almost like they've
[347] reinforced the sand beneath their feet,
[348] if you will. As for the islands, well,
[349] they've been constructed with rising
[350] seas and stronger storms in mind. Most
[351] sea level rise projections range from
[352] 0.3 to a meter. They've built a buffer
[353] for this combined with the
[354] cresant-shaped breakwater
[355] system. Ironically, this island might
[356] last longer than most coastal cities.
