# Intro

[1] Want to know why Dubai is back?
[2] Well, look to the sea.
[3] This is the Palm Jebali, the world's largest palm-shaped island.
[4] It'll have 2,000 luxury villas, 80 hotels, a sea village, a yacht club, and a mega mosque.
[5] All in all, it's going to more than double Dubai's current coastline.
[6] But if you're experiencing a bit of deja vu right now, then you're not alone because Dubai has actually done this before.
[7] This is the second time they've built the world's largest palm-shaped island.
[8] Only this one is bigger and bolder because, after all, it is a sequel.
[9] The first installment in this franchise was the Palm Jimra back in 2007.
[10] But suddenly, all the cranes on Dubai's skyline froze and construction stopped overnight.
[11] Many of Dubai's ambitious mega projects were paused or cancelled altogether thanks to the 2008 global financial crisis. They included plans for a kilometer high skyscraper, a fully rotating Super Tool, and oh so many artificial islands.
[12] The 2010s were rough for the world's glitziest oasis.
[13] But the city is now in the midst of a remarkable comeback.
[14] Dubai is building mega projects once again. This is Dubai 2.0.
[15] to but has it learned from the lessons of the past or is it doomed to make the same expensive mistakes?
# Dubai’s first reinvention

[16] In the early 1990s, Dubai was on the verge of its first remarkable reinvention.
[17] The city was a dusty outpost on the edge of the world.
[18] Most people had never heard of it.
[19] But that all changed with the construction of the sail-shaped Burj Alarab, a building so beautiful, it didn't just grab the world's attention, it demanded it.
[20] It didn't hurt that it was now also the first seven-star hotel ever constructed.
[21] Dubai was now no longer an outpost.
[22] It was becoming a center of luxury.
[23] So, the city built an enormous amount of luxury real estate. And that real estate demanded one thing above all else.
[24] Location, location, location.
[25] But Dubai had a problem.
[26] It was limited by 70 km of natural coastline. Now 70 km is a lot of coastline, but not all coastlines are created equal.
[27] This strip right here close to the city could fetch the best price.
[28] So Dubai created more prime coastline close to the center.
[29] All sorts of islands were dreamed up.
[30] There was the map of the world where you could live on your own British Isle.
[31] There was the universe and there was of course the palms. Each one bigger than the last.
[32] The first palm, Palm Jayra, added 50 km of new coastline to Dubai.
[33] It was a phenomenal success and became an instantly recognizable global icon.
[34] And then came 2008.
[35] Soaring gas prices, falling home prices, and rising unemployment.
[36] >> Every day they're pounding it.
[37] >> This is the most significant financial crisis in the postwar period. The stock market is now down 21%.
[38] >> Life, as most Americans know it, is about to change, in some cases dramatically.
[39] >> The financial crisis spread from America to the rest of the world.
[40] Dubai was hit harder and more visibly than any city outside of the West, partly because it depended on money coming in from those locations.
[41] All construction work stopped overnight, and some property prices fell by as much as 60%.
[42] Dubai World, an investment company that manages and supervises a whole range of businesses and projects for the Dubai government, asked to delay repayments on $26 billion worth of debt.
[43] That triggered panic and many people lost faith in Dubai.
# Dubai 2.0

[44] Cut to 2026 and it's a completely different story.
[45] Dubai is in the middle of a renaissance and back to doing what it does best, smashing world records.
[46] This is the world's tallest hotel, the world's skinniest skyscraper, the world's biggest airport, plus two record-breaking mega tall skyscrapers more than 700 m high.
[47] All of these projects have either been built in the last 2 years or are being built right now.
[48] But nothing exemplifies Dubai's returned bombasty more than the greenlighting of the Palm Jebali.
[49] And that green light flickered on in 2023 when local authorities approved a new master plan for the site.
[50] Progress has been accelerating ever since then.
[51] The palms are taking shape and a mini city is steadily being built on top of them and some of these homes will be impressive.
[52] We're talking glasswalled pen houses and sprawling waterfront villas.
[53] It's honestly hard not to be a little bit jealous when I'm sat here in rainy old London.
[54] So, naturally, I've decided to design my very own dream Dubai penthouse.
[55] All I need next to help this come true is to become a billionaire. Simple.
[56] Dreaming up my dream home was surprisingly easy thanks to Rayon Design, a fully cloudnative CAD platform made for professional interior designers and architects.
[57] It's usually hard to find one software that takes you from concept to finished drawing set, so you end up wasting a lot of time switching between tools. But Rayon Design streamlines the entire process.
[58] You can import industry standard files, create accurate technical drawings, and then put them in a presentation to be client ready, all in this one platform.
[59] No bouncing around between endless applications.
[60] Their built-in AI panel means you can quickly generate 3D axonometric views from your floor plans and sections,
[61] create sleek mood boards for your designs, or even make a bespoke material palette for a luxury penthouse on a new palm island.
[62] All of this while being able to collaborate with others instantaneously, so you've got ample time to focus on what really matters, like this gorgeous C view I'm going to have from my kitchen.
[63] And speaking of saving time, Rayon Design has a library of over 10,000 CAD blocks at scale.
[64] Look, I can drag anything from furniture to stove tops instantly onto my plan.
[65] If they still don't have what you want somehow, you can quickly AI generate custom blocks using images or even text prompts.
[66] You can try Round Design yourself for free using the link in the description.
[67] Now, let's get back to the main video because if I'm going to build my dream villa on sand, I want to make sure it's sitting on some pretty sturdy foundations.
[68] So, remind me again, how do you build the world's biggest palm island?
# Building world’s biggest palm island… again.

[69] How do you make land from scratch?
[70] Well, you dredge it.
[71] Huge volumes of sand from the Persian Gulf seabed were transported via pipelines and dredger barges to the island's site.
[72] There, a technique called rainbowing sprayed the sand in a controlled ark to deposit it precisely where needed to build up the trunk and fronds of the Palm Island.
[73] Simply placing sand on top of the seabed isn't enough.
[74] The reclaimed ground must support the weight of all the buildings on top.
[75] Think for a moment of a sand castle.
[76] It's possible to build a very large, very tall sand castle.
[77] We see it all the time.
[78] As we know, sand is made from many little individual grains.
[79] These grains touch each other at thousands of contact points.
[80] Together, they form a stable framework, otherwise known as a soil skeleton.
[81] Now, when weight is applied to the top of the sand, that weight is transmitted through these contact points from grain to grain.
[82] As each of these grains are irregular in shape, they interlock, making movement harder.
[83] The roughness creates friction, which in turn also makes movement harder.
[84] Water then fills the space between the grains. While it doesn't carry the weight, it can sometimes add temporary strength.
[85] That's how sand castles can get constructed so high.
[86] However, in the event of any seismic activity, this all goes to hell.
[87] Strong shaking causes sand grains to lose contact.
[88] Poor water pressure increases between the grains, which means the water starts carrying the load instead of the sand, which is not good.
[89] The soil loses strength and stiffness, and the ground behaves like thick fluid or quicksand.
[90] Our sand castle falls to the ground and any villa or skyscraper on top of it would do the same thing.
[91] Even without an earthquake, liquefaction can still be a pretty big problem when you're building on reclaimed land.
[92] Small movements can cause foundations to settle, which in turn can make buildings tilt or crack. It can buckle roads.
[93] It can even break underground service pipes.
[94] So, how does the Palm Jabali plan to get around this problem? Well, they kind of created their own earthquake.
[95] First, engineers used a method called viro compaction.
[96] It's where heavy vibrating probes are inserted down through the loose sand to a depth of about 15 m.
[97] The vibration along with injected water rearranges and densifies the sand grains, packing them closer together.
[98] Making the sand denser means more grainto-rain contact and friction, both of which create greater stability.
[99] The whole island itself is surrounded by a cresant-shaped breakwater system.
[100] This protective structure made primarily of sand and rocks is designed to shield the artificial island from strong tides, waves, and seasonal storms.
[101] This one in particular is 17 km long and about 200 m wide, making it even larger than the one around Palmyra.
[102] Construction began with marine surveying of the seabed to map depths and conditions.
[103] Huge rock armor units were brought in, often weighing several tons each.
[104] These rocks were placed layer by layer over the base.
[105] A fleet of barges, tugboats, and dredges transported these rocks before large floating cranes lifted and set them into position.
[106] The sloping shape of the breakwater and the graded rock layers were designed so that incoming waves lose energy progressively rather than just hitting a vertical face
[107] that reduces scour around the base of the breakwater while protecting the reclaimed land and islands on the interior.
[108] As the rocks were positioned by the cranes, they were verified by GPS and divers under the water which gave them incredible precision.
[109] In fact, a lot of the construction of the Palm Jebali used GPS technology.
[110] Because the entire island was created offshore with no physical reference points like roads or fixed land boundaries, GPS was actually essential.
[111] Engineers converted the palm design into digital coordinates.
[112] Those coordinates were then fed into GPS systems which were then relayed to the dredges and the dredges poured their sand according to the digital model.
[113] It was almost like 3D printing an entire island.
[114] With the land pulled up from the sea, construction could then begin on everything else.
[115] Roads, utilities, sewage systems, villas, and of course, hotels.
[116] They're building a small city on top of this island, and that's no easy feat.
[117] Dubai has outdone itself and successfully constructed a Palm Island that's more than twice as big as their last record-breaking Palm Island.
[118] The first phase of villas have also completely sold out.
[119] So, how did we get here from 2008?
# After the crash

[120] How was Dubai not only able to recover but also start building massive mega projects once again?
[121] Now, bear with us because things are going to get a little bit complicated.
[122] Before 2008, Dubai had a property bubble that was driven by cheap global credit.
[123] The sudden freeze of liquidity after Lehman collapsed meant that people from overseas were no longer buying real estate. So Abu Dhabi bailed them out.
[124] Abu Dhabi is here.
[125] It's the other famous emirates in the UAE and it's the one with all the cash. Why is that?
[126] It's because Abu Dhabi holds 95% of all the UAE's oil and 90% of its gas.
[127] Dubai, on the other hand, has smaller, more depleted oil reserves that only contribute a fraction to the economy.
[128] In December of 2009, the government of Abu Dhabi provided $10 billion to the Dubai Financial Support Fund.
[129] The money was used to meet some of the immediate debt obligations of Dubai world as well as some other obligations while longerterm debt restructuring was negotiated.
[130] That's the moment that changed Dubai forever. It set new rules for the UAE.
[131] While Dubai could innovate, it was Abu Dhabi that settled the balance sheet.
[132] The impact was evident almost immediately.
[133] Most famously, the Burj Dubai was renamed the Burj Khalifa after Abu Dhabi's ruler.
[134] Now, Dubai had phased developments instead of simultaneous mega projects, and there was much stricter real estate regulation to grapple with.
[135] There wasn't an abandonment of Dubai's crazy build mentality. It was a refinement.
[136] In a way, 2008 helped the city to mature and grow up. And it paid off.
[137] Dubai is now no longer recovering, but thriving.
[138] The place has established itself as a neutral parking spot for international wealth thanks to no income tax and fast visas.
[139] Dubai is once again seeing international money flowing from Russia, China, and Europe, which is in turn funding vast construction projects.
[140] But this time, it's accompanied by a huge population boom.
[141] While many new buildings are still essentially safety deposit boxes in the sky, there are other buildings actually being built for people to live and work in too.
[142] The big question is, will any of this last?
[143] And to be honest, it's a question that only time can answer.
[144] By all accounts, the foundations of this new Dubai 2.0 do seem to be constructed on pretty sturdy ground.
[145] It's almost like they've reinforced the sand beneath their feet, if you will.
[146] As for the islands, well, they've been constructed with rising seas and stronger storms in mind.
[147] Most sea level rise projections range from 0.3 to a meter.
[148] They've built a buffer for this combined with the cresant-shaped breakwater system.
[149] Ironically, this island might last longer than most coastal cities.
[150] And that seems to go for the rest of the city now as well. Dubai is being built to last.
[151] This video was sponsored by Rayon Design.
[152] Don't forget that if you're a professional interior designer or an architect, you're going to want to check out Rayon Design for yourself for free at the link in the description.
[153] And as always guys, if you enjoyed this video and you want to get more from the definitive video channel for construction, make sure you're subscribed to the B1M