[0] Roughly a quarter of the surface area of
[1] Amsterdam is covered in water. 165
[2] canals run over 100 km throughout the
[3] city and more than 1200 bridges make it
[4] walkable or bikable. Most of it was
[5] built in the span of a single century
[6] and its growth can be simplified into a
[7] couple specific stages.
[8] >> Amsterdam is much more of a planned city
[9] and there's a lot of constraints. The
[10] way people deal with these constraints
[11] are very interesting, I think. And when
[12] you start to understand the motivations
[13] for each section, you can read the map
[14] like a book.
[15] We made it to Amsterdam and it is so
[16] beautiful. I am so excited to make this
[17] video because this is one I've been
[18] looking forward to for a long time.
[19] Honestly,
[20] at this point, I don't really know much
[21] about the city yet, but I've gotten in
[22] contact with a couple people who know a
[23] lot. My name is Yap Aford Abrahamsa and
[24] I uh I'm an architectural historian and
[25] I work for the cultural heritage agency
[26] of the Netherlands and as an endowed
[27] professor of architectural history at
[28] the VU University uh in Amsterdam.
[29] >> My name is Yohim. I was born and raised
[30] in Amsterdam and I run the YouTube
[31] channel the present past.
[32] >> My name is Alar Deil. I'm a historian
[33] and I've worked for a long time as a
[34] curator at the Amsterdam Museum.
[35] If you follow the Amstl River to the
[36] sea, just as you get to the canal belt,
[37] you will see an unnaturally straight
[38] stretch of river. This is the first
[39] man-made canal in the city, and it's the
[40] reason Amsterdam exists here. Dug in the
[41] 12th or 13th century, this canal was the
[42] solution to a problem that farmers in
[43] the region had been dealing with. The
[44] landscape they farmed was a low-lying,
[45] flat, marshy area made up of pete. So
[46] Pete is basically dead leaves that have
[47] stacked on top of each other, have been
[48] pressed together over the millennia to
[49] make a ground that is um organic and
[50] quite soft. To make the land suitable
[51] for farming, the water needed to be
[52] drained. There are still places not far
[53] from the city where you can visualize
[54] what this would have been like.
[55] But there was a problem. The land wasn't
[56] draining as fast as they needed it to.
[57] It was too far upstream from its outlet.
[58] But if they could connect it to a closer
[59] outlet, then it could drain much faster.
[60] So that's exactly what they did.
[61] Building this canal turned two rivers
[62] into one, the Amstl. And it solved their
[63] problem of drainage, but it also created
[64] a new problem. Now, when there was a
[65] storm surge, salty water could be pushed
[66] up river and threaten the crops.
[67] And this leads us to modern-day Dam
[68] Square.
[69] Okay, this place is called Dam Square
[70] and it's called Dam Square because this
[71] used to be the dam in the river Amstel
[72] that gave Amsterdam its name and it
[73] closed off the mouth of the river Amsel.
[74] But as you look around here now, you
[75] don't see any dam and you don't see any
[76] any river. The canals have been filled
[77] in and lots of new buildings have been
[78] created and instead of boats, you see
[79] the trams and the cars and the bikes
[80] going over this place right now.
[81] As unassuming as it may seem now, this
[82] dam was the foundation of the city. It
[83] could be opened to let the fresh water
[84] out and closed to prevent the salt water
[85] from coming in.
[86] >> The pet soil
[87] uh is subsiding while the sea uh is
[88] still there. So you have to build um uh
[89] dams and dikes to contain the sea.
[90] >> But the creation of the dam had a bigger
[91] impact. Without it, the Amstel would
[92] have remained a minor river in a swampy
[93] delta. But with the canal and the dam,
[94] this was now a hub for trade.
[95] >> The river Amsel was inland connection
[96] where you could get to Rotterdam and
[97] Dor. So you didn't have to sail the
[98] North Sea which was a very dangerous
[99] place. So this was the crossing of a
[100] river and an important road. So this is
[101] the place where a lot of where the
[102] harbor of Amsterdam um
[103] was created.
[104] >> Literally the beginning of the city goes
[105] back to controlling the water.
[106] When looking at the first section of the
[107] city, it becomes clear that the dam is
[108] at its center. From there, buildings
[109] were built on both sides of the river
[110] and the city turned into an H shape. By
[111] the way, this map is oriented with north
[112] on the bottom and south on the top.
[113] >> This year, we're celebrating the 750th
[114] birthday of Amsterdam. It's not actually
[115] the birthday because people were living
[116] here, but they were mentioned in in 1275
[117] in a document that granted the people
[118] living in Amsterdama.
[119] So the people living in where the dam
[120] and the Amsterl was constructed, they
[121] were granted privileges to trade their
[122] goods in the in the bigger area. The
[123] effect was that it accelerated growth,
[124] that it attracted other people who came
[125] to the city. So gradually, you know, the
[126] city started to expand, which meant that
[127] every time they had to deal with this
[128] marshy lands and and build dikes to to
[129] stop the water. As the city grew, they
[130] built two additional drainage canals on
[131] either side of the Amstl. And building
[132] on this swampy soft soil was not easy.
[133] Because many of the structures of the
[134] medieval city were made of wood and
[135] because there's been centuries of
[136] redevelopment since then very few
[137] original buildings from this period
[138] exist but this is one of them. This is
[139] the outer the old church and well as the
[140] name would have it. It's the old church.
[141] Uh it's actually the oldest building we
[142] have left in Amsterdam and it rests on
[143] top of more than 2,000 wooden piles.
[144] These are massive tree trunks planted
[145] beneath the buildings to keep them from
[146] sinking into the soil. And this was
[147] common across the entire city.
[148] >> The poles we we we ram into the ground
[149] either 12, 20, or 50 m because that is
[150] the three layers where you actually have
[151] a sandy soil.
[152] >> It's proven to be probably the best
[153] solution, but it's definitely not
[154] perfect. Uh the buildings are actually
[155] in place, but the rest of Amsterdam is
[156] same. So the the streets have to be
[157] redone every few years and they have to
[158] be heightened up every time.
[159] >> In addition to the drainage canals, they
[160] would also build raised dikes to prevent
[161] certain areas from flooding and a lot of
[162] these doubled as roads and their names
[163] make it quite clear what they were.
[164] >> We're now walking on uh zyke, which
[165] literally translates to sea dyke. So
[166] this is literally where the old dyke of
[167] the city used to be. And if you look at
[168] the map, you can see this this curve
[169] around it. If you're just tracing the
[170] outline of the coast where you're going
[171] to put your dyke, it's never going to be
[172] super straight. So you can really see
[173] the height difference. If you look over
[174] there and you see the people drinking a
[175] beer, they're literally on a different
[176] level. So if you are on a patch of
[177] elevation like we're here now on the Z
[178] D, it means it's it is man-made. It's
[179] not a it's an unnatural occurrence.
[180] >> The boundary of the medieval city is
[181] marked by these two canals which also
[182] served as its moat.
[183] >> It's Amsel with dam square and two
[184] canals on either side and then a new
[185] city wall was built around it with a new
[186] canal and that's basically the medieval
[187] structure of the city. When you look at
[188] the medieval city versus the rest of the
[189] canal belt, there's a distinct visual
[190] difference between the irregular windy
[191] roads of the center of the city versus
[192] the more planned areas beyond it. So
[193] when you're walking around the city,
[194] there's a clear distinction between each
[195] of these expansions. And you can see it
[196] where we're standing really clearly
[197] because this water, this canal is now
[198] just part of the canal system, but it
[199] used to be the moat. And the city gate
[200] is back there that we were looking at.
[201] But this side you can see just a solid
[202] wall of all the buildings. And on this
[203] side you can see the roads cutting in to
[204] each of these blocks. There are two
[205] other structures from this era that I
[206] want to point out.
[207] Over there is the edge of the medieval
[208] city and you can see one part of the
[209] medieval city wall that's still
[210] standing. It's called the store. This is
[211] often referred to as the weeping tower
[212] because it was from this spot that
[213] sailors would leave their families for
[214] months or years on long voyages. If you
[215] follow just a short way down the path of
[216] the old city wall, you'll come to
[217] another surviving building, the old city
[218] gate.
[219] So, if you look over there, you can see
[220] where it says restaurant cafe. Um, that
[221] is actually where the old gate to the
[222] city used to be. It's like a tree has
[223] rings to indicate its age. And a city
[224] also has rings. And we're standing right
[225] here on one of these rings showing the
[226] medieval part of the city and outside
[227] there the more modern part of the city.
[228] The world changes fast and you want to
[229] be ready for when it does. And that's
[230] what can make debt so scary. But it's as
[231] scary as it is common. So that's why
[232] when PDS debt reached out to sponsor
[233] today's video and I saw that they have
[234] an A+ with the Better Business Bureau as
[235] well as over a thousand positive reviews
[236] on Google, that made me feel confident
[237] that this is a service that could really
[238] help you if you're dealing with debt.
[239] They've helped hundreds of thousands of
[240] people break free from credit cards and
[241] loans and highinterest traps. PDS Debt
[242] crafts a personalized plan designed just
[243] for your unique financial situation.
[244] Their job is to help you save more, pay
[245] off your debt faster, and keep more
[246] money in your pocket where it belongs,
[247] and there's no minimum credit score
[248] requirement. If I were dealing with
[249] debt, this would be a service I would
[250] absolutely be looking into. So, you're
[251] just 30 seconds away from beginning your
[252] journey to being debtfree. Get your free
[253] assessment and find the best option for
[254] you at pdsdebt.com/danielststeiner.
[255] That's pdsdebt.com/danielsteiner.
[256] pds.com/danielststeiner.
[257] Back to the video about Amsterdam's map.
[258] It's kind of hard to overstate the
[259] impact that the Reformation had on
[260] Europe. Not just directly, but also the
[261] chain of events that it caused. The
[262] Reformation sparked wars across Europe.
[263] Backed by the Pope, kings and emperors
[264] sent out armies to crush cities that
[265] opposed Catholic rule. At first,
[266] Amsterdam stayed loyal to Catholic
[267] Spain, but by 1578, it officially became
[268] Protestant.
[269] >> It was called the Alterasi. So, we're
[270] welcoming sort of Protestant refugees
[271] also from all over Europe.
[272] >> And this happened just before the fall
[273] of Antworp, the moment when the Spanish
[274] captured the largest and wealthiest city
[275] in the low countries. And fell into the
[276] into Spanish hands and almost half of
[277] the population left the city and
[278] Amsterdam took over as the main trade
[279] hub in the Netherlands and even in in
[280] the northwest Europe. So at that time
[281] Amsterdam started to grow really really
[282] really fast and new harbor areas were
[283] created and they really had to be
[284] designed to accommodate this large
[285] influx of people. A new city wall was
[286] built further out and the original one
[287] was torn down. This actually created an
[288] open space around that original city
[289] gate that we were looking at, which
[290] would now be used as a way station in
[291] the center of a city market, which is
[292] still referenced in the name of the
[293] area.
[294] On the east side of the city, a canal
[295] was added, and on the west side, a much
[296] more robust harbor. This harbor area is
[297] the perfect visual example on a map of
[298] what was about to happen to Amsterdam.
[299] The Dutch were going to take the naval
[300] strength they had and turn it into a
[301] global power.
[302] If you look at the map, you can see that
[303] Amsterdam is sort of between the eastern
[304] part of Europe, Finland to to Denmark to
[305] Poland and the southern parts, Spain. So
[306] Amsterdam is perfectly positioned in the
[307] middle. And there's a second nice
[308] position. You can see actually that
[309] Amsterdam is at the end of a huge
[310] European delta of rivers. crisscrossing
[311] all the way through the continent.
[312] By capitalizing on this position,
[313] Amsterdam ushered in the Dutch golden
[314] age. Amsterdam became the financial
[315] capital of the world. And it was under
[316] these circumstances that the modern
[317] stock exchange was born. It was during
[318] this era that the canal belt we know was
[319] created.
[320] The Dutch East India Company and later
[321] the Dutch West India Company were
[322] established and began extracting
[323] resources from all over the world.
[324] The Dutch Golden Age was more than just
[325] money. It was an era of scientific
[326] advancement, an outpouring of art from
[327] people like Rembrandt and Vermeier, and
[328] closely related, mapping. The Dutch got
[329] really good at mapping. The largest and
[330] most expensive book published in the
[331] 17th century was a 600page atlas
[332] published by Yan Blau. It displayed the
[333] precision and quality of mapmaking at
[334] the height of the Dutch Golden Age. As
[335] Amsterdam grew in global prominence, so
[336] did its risk of outside threat.
[337] Surrounded by Spain, England, and
[338] France, it became clear that
[339] fortifications and canals would need to
[340] be built to protect the city.
[341] >> The city was expanding and was doing
[342] well. So also a lot of people from from
[343] Germany, for instance, from Scandinavia
[344] came here to work to build these canals
[345] uh to work on the ships that were
[346] sailing to uh Asia. So the city grew
[347] very very fast in the 17th century.
[348] >> The solution was drawn up under the city
[349] surveyor and the city engineer. The plan
[350] would double the size of Amsterdam.
[351] Streets and canals followed a carefully
[352] designed grid and arc pattern adapted to
[353] the swampy terrain. But there was a
[354] risk. Would the city continue to grow in
[355] population at the same rate? What if
[356] they built all this and no one came? So
[357] the solution was to do it in two parts.
[358] >> It's almost like a windscreen wiper. You
[359] see the city expanding like a like a
[360] windscreen and at one point it's it
[361] stops.
[362] >> And within this plan there are two
[363] distinct sections. The first is a series
[364] of canals. These were positioned at
[365] different distances from each other to
[366] create one row for the wealthiest canal
[367] houses with the largest garden areas and
[368] another for the slightly less wealthy.
[369] These were very much intended to be
[370] separated from the rest of the
[371] expansion, the Jordan. This area was for
[372] the lower class to keep their smelly,
[373] noisy work. But by the time they started
[374] building this, they had a problem. There
[375] had been so many immigrants moving to
[376] the city that many of them had just
[377] started building on random plots outside
[378] the city wall. This turned into like
[379] like a giant puzzle of people they had
[380] to move around. So what they did was
[381] they created the canals next to the
[382] existing city. And many of the people
[383] who are already living there, they moved
[384] out into the agricultural land that was
[385] also urbanized. It was like a a phob
[386] informally urbanized area and they had
[387] to move out from the canal to make room
[388] for the canals. They moved them out into
[389] the Yordan area. Uh and then the
[390] structure of this Yordan area couldn't
[391] be changed anymore because part of the
[392] building was already there. So it was
[393] already urbanized
[394] before it really became part of the
[395] city. And that is why you see these
[396] different structures on the map.
[397] >> You can see that the angle and width of
[398] the roads in the Jordan area perfectly
[399] match the farming pattern. This is a
[400] direct result of how fast the city was
[401] growing.
[402] >> So this was really an outskirt of
[403] Amsterdam. There were no burrow fairs.
[404] You couldn't go through and nobody
[405] needed to go through because it was like
[406] the edge of the city. No industries were
[407] allowed in the canal zone because this
[408] was the residential zone and zoning was
[409] very strict.
[410] So all the industries were pushed out
[411] into uh the Yordan area which at the
[412] same time was uh lying lower. So also
[413] the canals were uh less deep and like
[414] the the profile the the water didn't
[415] flow through it at all. So the water was
[416] still so there was a very big
[417] environmental problem that was created
[418] by this fragmentation of the plan.
[419] >> The city must have stunk. Everywhere
[420] I've read about this, it's mentioned how
[421] bad the city smelled. It was used as an
[422] open sewer all the way to 1930. So, I
[423] don't think there was anywhere in the
[424] city that wasn't smelly. But because
[425] Jordan was made up of a bunch of wooden
[426] structures that were really densely
[427] packed together, many of the fires that
[428] did happen in the city happened in this
[429] area. And on its other side was the new
[430] bastioned wall and moat, the path of
[431] which is still visible in a modern map.
[432] By the time they built this, it was
[433] already fully populated. Population
[434] growth had slowed slightly, but it was
[435] still growing, and the Dutch were still
[436] expanding their colonies. So, they
[437] decided to continue on with their plan,
[438] completing the full star-shaped bastion
[439] ring around the city. But just 10 years
[440] after it was finished being constructed
[441] came what would be known as the year of
[442] disaster. A moment of attack from
[443] England and France that marked the end
[444] of the golden age. The population
[445] stopped growing and urban development
[446] froze.
[447] >> The upside of economic downturn was that
[448] there was a lot of greenery in inside
[449] Amsterdam. The burglar masters of
[450] Amsterdam, the Amsterdam government,
[451] they chose to make the best of it. And
[452] as they couldn't sell these as building
[453] plots, they uh chose to rent them as um
[454] garden plots. The area was called the
[455] Plantagia, which we translate as
[456] plantation, a big green area inside the
[457] city. The only remnant of this
[458] plantation area, this Plantagia, is the
[459] zoo called artistis, but the rest was
[460] parcel out and sold.
[461] Amsterdam's modern development has
[462] jumped the canal belt. But it was the
[463] golden age that forged the iconic
[464] foundation of the city.
[465] In the 19th century, after 200 years of
[466] stagnation, everything started again
[467] with the creation of the North Sea
[468] Canal, which gave Amsterdam a new link
[469] to the North Sea and a new connection to
[470] the world for bigger ships. So that gave
[471] a big impulse to the harbor. And at the
[472] same time the central station was
[473] created and they built central station
[474] on an artificial island in front of the
[475] harbor.
[476] >> The construction of this central station
[477] really cut off the city from that
[478] harbor.
[479] >> There were huge discussions concerning
[480] about the location of this station. So
[481] actually the Dutch government not the
[482] Amsterdam government took the decision
[483] to create central station over there.
[484] >> There have been many efforts over the
[485] years to make the city center more
[486] accessible. They created a breakthrough
[487] street
[488] strat city hall street which connects
[489] the now palace on dam square which used
[490] to be city hall to the new areas that
[491] were being developed beyond the city
[492] walls in the 19th century. So this
[493] street is from the from the 1880s. This
[494] is like a quite a nice ensemble of 19th
[495] century building by the Fronent
[496] architectural firm which was one of the
[497] best I think in Amsterdam's 19th century
[498] >> architecture scene. Yeah.
[499] >> But despite all of the changes and
[500] proposals, Amsterdam has still managed
[501] to keep its charm.
[502] >> If you're on the canals, you never have
[503] a line of sight that goes on for too
[504] long. And that makes it feel cozy.
[505] Because if you compare that to a place
[506] like Paris where they completely
[507] redesigned the city in the 19th century
[508] and it's very clear that it's not
[509] tailored to to a person but it has a
[510] different idea. But Amsterdam is still
[511] very very human. I have to say after
[512] making all of the videos that I have
[513] made about New York and about New
[514] Amsterdam and now being here and
[515] thinking about that, it's making me
[516] wonder what New York could have been
[517] like if the English hadn't taken over.
[518] could have been a very different city.
[519] Might have felt like this.
[520] >> For me, it's always a feeling of, you
[521] know, actually walking through history.
[522] The further you move away from the
[523] center, from the origins of the city,
[524] you move through history and you get
[525] more and more to contemporary city.
[526] >> And if you can't go walk physically
[527] through it, maybe now you can read it on
[528] its map.
[529] Huge thanks to Yap, Yakam, and Anmarie
[530] for helping me with this video. I've put
[531] links in the description to all of their
[532] work, so you can go check that out. And
[533] to the rest of you, thank you for
[534] watching. If you liked this, please hit
[535] the like button. Please subscribe to the
[536] channel if you haven't. We just hit
[537] 300,000, so that's really exciting.
[538] Share with your friends and family. It
[539] helps me a lot so that I can keep making
[540] these. And if you want to support me on
[541] my Patreon, that's also linked below.
[542] But either way, I'll see you guys in
[543] another video very soon. Peace.