# Intro

[0] Roughly a quarter of the surface area of Amsterdam is covered in water.
[1] 165 canals run over 100 km throughout the city and more than 1200 bridges make it walkable or bikable.
[2] Most of it was built in the span of a single century and its growth can be simplified into a couple specific stages.
[3] >> Amsterdam is much more of a planned city and there's a lot of constraints.
[4] The way people deal with these constraints are very interesting, I think.
[5] And when you start to understand the motivations for each section, you can read the map like a book.
[6] We made it to Amsterdam and it is so beautiful.
[7] I am so excited to make this video because this is one I've been looking forward to for a long time.
[8] Honestly, at this point, I don't really know much about the city yet, but I've gotten in contact with a couple people who know a lot.
[9] My name is Yap Aford Abrahamsa and I uh I'm an architectural historian and I work for the cultural heritage agency of the Netherlands and as an endowed professor of architectural history at the VU University uh in Amsterdam.
[10] >> My name is Yohim.
[11] I was born and raised in Amsterdam and I run the YouTube channel the present past.
[12] >> My name is Alar Deil.
[13] I'm a historian and I've worked for a long time as a curator at the Amsterdam Museum.
# Amsterdam's Beginning

[14] If you follow the Amstl River to the sea, just as you get to the canal belt, you will see an unnaturally straight stretch of river.
[15] This is the first man-made canal in the city, and it's the reason Amsterdam exists here.
[16] Dug in the 12th or 13th century, this canal was the solution to a problem that farmers in the region had been dealing with.
[17] The landscape they farmed was a low-lying, flat, marshy area made up of pete.
[18] So Pete is basically dead leaves that have stacked on top of each other, have been pressed together over the millennia to make a ground that is um organic and quite soft.
[19] To make the land suitable for farming, the water needed to be drained.
[20] There are still places not far from the city where you can visualize what this would have been like.
[21] But there was a problem.
[22] The land wasn't draining as fast as they needed it to.
[23] It was too far upstream from its outlet.
[24] But if they could connect it to a closer outlet, then it could drain much faster.
[25] So that's exactly what they did.
[26] Building this canal turned two rivers into one, the Amstl.
[27] And it solved their problem of drainage, but it also created a new problem.
[28] Now, when there was a storm surge, salty water could be pushed up river and threaten the crops.
[29] And this leads us to modern-day Dam Square.
[30] Okay, this place is called Dam Square and it's called Dam Square because this used to be the dam in the river Amstel that gave Amsterdam its name and it closed off the mouth of the river Amsel.
[31] But as you look around here now, you don't see any dam and you don't see any any river.
[32] The canals have been filled in and lots of new buildings have been created and instead of boats, you see the trams and the cars and the bikes going over this place right now.
[33] As unassuming as it may seem now, this dam was the foundation of the city.
[34] It could be opened to let the fresh water out and closed to prevent the salt water from coming in.
[35] >> The pet soil uh is subsiding while the sea uh is still there.
[36] So you have to build um uh dams and dikes to contain the sea.
[37] >> But the creation of the dam had a bigger impact.
[38] Without it, the Amstel would have remained a minor river in a swampy delta.
[39] But with the canal and the dam, this was now a hub for trade.
[40] >> The river Amsel was inland connection where you could get to Rotterdam and Dor.
[41] So you didn't have to sail the North Sea which was a very dangerous place.
[42] So this was the crossing of a river and an important road.
[43] So this is the place where a lot of where the harbor of Amsterdam um was created.
[44] >> Literally the beginning of the city goes back to controlling the water.
# The Medieval City

[45] When looking at the first section of the city, it becomes clear that the dam is at its center.
[46] From there, buildings were built on both sides of the river and the city turned into an H shape.
[47] By the way, this map is oriented with north on the bottom and south on the top.
[48] >> This year, we're celebrating the 750th birthday of Amsterdam.
[49] It's not actually the birthday because people were living here, but they were mentioned in in 1275 in a document that granted the people living in Amsterdama.
[50] So the people living in where the dam and the Amsterl was constructed, they were granted privileges to trade their goods in the in the bigger area.
[51] The effect was that it accelerated growth, that it attracted other people who came to the city.
[52] So gradually, you know, the city started to expand, which meant that every time they had to deal with this marshy lands and and build dikes to to stop the water.
[53] As the city grew, they built two additional drainage canals on either side of the Amstl.
[54] And building on this swampy soft soil was not easy.
[55] Because many of the structures of the medieval city were made of wood and because there's been centuries of redevelopment since then very few original buildings from this period exist but this is one of them.
[56] This is the outer the old church and well as the name would have it.
[57] It's the old church.
[58] Uh it's actually the oldest building we have left in Amsterdam and it rests on top of more than 2,000 wooden piles.
[59] These are massive tree trunks planted beneath the buildings to keep them from sinking into the soil.
[60] And this was common across the entire city.
[61] >> The poles we we we ram into the ground either 12, 20, or 50 m because that is the three layers where you actually have a sandy soil.
[62] >> It's proven to be probably the best solution, but it's definitely not perfect.
[63] Uh the buildings are actually in place, but the rest of Amsterdam is same.
[64] So the the streets have to be redone every few years and they have to be heightened up every time.
[65] >> In addition to the drainage canals, they would also build raised dikes to prevent certain areas from flooding and a lot of these doubled as roads and their names make it quite clear what they were.
[66] >> We're now walking on uh zyke, which literally translates to sea dyke.
[67] So this is literally where the old dyke of the city used to be.
[68] And if you look at the map, you can see this this curve around it.
[69] If you're just tracing the outline of the coast where you're going to put your dyke, it's never going to be super straight.
[70] So you can really see the height difference.
[71] If you look over there and you see the people drinking a beer, they're literally on a different level.
[72] So if you are on a patch of elevation like we're here now on the Z D, it means it's it is man-made.
[73] It's not a it's an unnatural occurrence.
[74] >> The boundary of the medieval city is marked by these two canals which also served as its moat.
[75] >> It's Amsel with dam square and two canals on either side and then a new city wall was built around it with a new canal and that's basically the medieval structure of the city.
[76] When you look at the medieval city versus the rest of the canal belt, there's a distinct visual difference between the irregular windy roads of the center of the city versus the more planned areas beyond it.
[77] So when you're walking around the city, there's a clear distinction between each of these expansions.
[78] And you can see it where we're standing really clearly because this water, this canal is now just part of the canal system, but it used to be the moat.
[79] And the city gate is back there that we were looking at.
[80] But this side you can see just a solid wall of all the buildings.
[81] And on this side you can see the roads cutting in to each of these blocks.
[82] There are two other structures from this era that I want to point out.
[83] Over there is the edge of the medieval city and you can see one part of the medieval city wall that's still standing.
[84] It's called the store.
[85] This is often referred to as the weeping tower because it was from this spot that sailors would leave their families for months or years on long voyages.
[86] If you follow just a short way down the path of the old city wall, you'll come to another surviving building, the old city gate.
[87] So, if you look over there, you can see where it says restaurant cafe.
[88] Um, that is actually where the old gate to the city used to be.
[89] It's like a tree has rings to indicate its age.
[90] And a city also has rings.
[91] And we're standing right here on one of these rings showing the medieval part of the city and outside there the more modern part of the city.
# Ad

[92] The world changes fast and you want to be ready for when it does.
[93] And that's what can make debt so scary.
[94] But it's as scary as it is common.
[95] So that's why when PDS debt reached out to sponsor today's video and I saw that they have an A+ with the Better Business Bureau as well as over a thousand positive reviews on Google, that made me feel confident that this is a service that could really help you if you're dealing with debt.
[96] They've helped hundreds of thousands of people break free from credit cards and loans and highinterest traps.
[97] PDS Debt crafts a personalized plan designed just for your unique financial situation.
[98] Their job is to help you save more, pay off your debt faster, and keep more money in your pocket where it belongs, and there's no minimum credit score requirement.
[99] If I were dealing with debt, this would be a service I would absolutely be looking into.
[100] So, you're just 30 seconds away from beginning your journey to being debtfree.
[101] Get your free assessment and find the best option for you at pdsdebt.com/danielststeiner.
[102] That's pdsdebt.com/danielsteiner.
[103] pds.com/danielststeiner.
[104] Back to the video about Amsterdam's map.
# First and Second Expansion

[105] It's kind of hard to overstate the impact that the Reformation had on Europe.
[106] Not just directly, but also the chain of events that it caused.
[107] The Reformation sparked wars across Europe.
[108] Backed by the Pope, kings and emperors sent out armies to crush cities that opposed Catholic rule.
[109] At first, Amsterdam stayed loyal to Catholic Spain, but by 1578, it officially became Protestant.
[110] >> It was called the Alterasi.
[111] So, we're welcoming sort of Protestant refugees also from all over Europe.
[112] >> And this happened just before the fall of Antworp, the moment when the Spanish captured the largest and wealthiest city in the low countries.
[113] And fell into the into Spanish hands and almost half of the population left the city and Amsterdam took over as the main trade hub in the Netherlands and even in in the northwest Europe.
[114] So at that time Amsterdam started to grow really really really fast and new harbor areas were created and they really had to be designed to accommodate this large influx of people.
[115] A new city wall was built further out and the original one was torn down.
[116] This actually created an open space around that original city gate that we were looking at, which would now be used as a way station in the center of a city market, which is still referenced in the name of the area.
[117] On the east side of the city, a canal was added, and on the west side, a much more robust harbor.
[118] This harbor area is the perfect visual example on a map of what was about to happen to Amsterdam.
# The Dutch Golden Age

[119] The Dutch were going to take the naval strength they had and turn it into a global power.
[120] If you look at the map, you can see that Amsterdam is sort of between the eastern part of Europe, Finland to to Denmark to Poland and the southern parts, Spain.
[121] So Amsterdam is perfectly positioned in the middle.
[122] And there's a second nice position.
[123] You can see actually that Amsterdam is at the end of a huge European delta of rivers.
[124] crisscrossing all the way through the continent. By capitalizing on this position, Amsterdam ushered in the Dutch golden age.
[125] Amsterdam became the financial capital of the world.
[126] And it was under these circumstances that the modern stock exchange was born.
[127] It was during this era that the canal belt we know was created.
[128] The Dutch East India Company and later the Dutch West India Company were established and began extracting resources from all over the world.
[129] The Dutch Golden Age was more than just money.
[130] It was an era of scientific advancement, an outpouring of art from people like Rembrandt and Vermeier, and closely related, mapping.
[131] The Dutch got really good at mapping.
[132] The largest and most expensive book published in the 17th century was a 600page atlas published by Yan Blau.
[133] It displayed the precision and quality of mapmaking at the height of the Dutch Golden Age.
[134] As Amsterdam grew in global prominence, so did its risk of outside threat.
[135] Surrounded by Spain, England, and France, it became clear that fortifications and canals would need to be built to protect the city.
[136] >> The city was expanding and was doing well.
[137] So also a lot of people from from Germany, for instance, from Scandinavia came here to work to build these canals uh to work on the ships that were sailing to uh Asia.
[138] So the city grew very very fast in the 17th century.
# A New Plan

[139] >> The solution was drawn up under the city surveyor and the city engineer.
[140] The plan would double the size of Amsterdam.
[141] Streets and canals followed a carefully designed grid and arc pattern adapted to the swampy terrain.
[142] But there was a risk.
[143] Would the city continue to grow in population at the same rate?
[144] What if they built all this and no one came?
[145] So the solution was to do it in two parts.
[146] >> It's almost like a windscreen wiper.
[147] You see the city expanding like a like a windscreen and at one point it's it stops.
[148] >> And within this plan there are two distinct sections.
[149] The first is a series of canals.
[150] These were positioned at different distances from each other to create one row for the wealthiest canal houses with the largest garden areas and another for the slightly less wealthy.
[151] These were very much intended to be separated from the rest of the expansion, the Jordan.
[152] This area was for the lower class to keep their smelly, noisy work.
[153] But by the time they started building this, they had a problem.
[154] There had been so many immigrants moving to the city that many of them had just started building on random plots outside the city wall.
[155] This turned into like like a giant puzzle of people they had to move around.
[156] So what they did was they created the canals next to the existing city.
[157] And many of the people who are already living there, they moved out into the agricultural land that was also urbanized.
[158] It was like a a phob informally urbanized area and they had to move out from the canal to make room for the canals.
[159] They moved them out into the Yordan area. Uh and then the structure of this Yordan area couldn't be changed anymore because part of the building was already there. So it was already urbanized
[160] before it really became part of the city. And that is why you see these different structures on the map.
[161] >> You can see that the angle and width of the roads in the Jordan area perfectly match the farming pattern. This is a direct result of how fast the city was growing.
[162] >> So this was really an outskirt of Amsterdam. There were no burrow fairs. You couldn't go through and nobody needed to go through because it was like the edge of the city.
[163] No industries were allowed in the canal zone because this was the residential zone and zoning was very strict.
[164] So all the industries were pushed out into uh the Yordan area which at the same time was uh lying lower.
[165] So also the canals were uh less deep and like the the profile the the water didn't flow through it at all. So the water was still so there was a very big environmental problem that was created by this fragmentation of the plan.
[166] >> The city must have stunk. Everywhere I've read about this, it's mentioned how bad the city smelled.
[167] It was used as an open sewer all the way to 1930. So, I don't think there was anywhere in the city that wasn't smelly.
[168] But because Jordan was made up of a bunch of wooden structures that were really densely packed together, many of the fires that did happen in the city happened in this area.
[169] And on its other side was the new bastioned wall and moat, the path of which is still visible in a modern map.
[170] By the time they built this, it was already fully populated.
[171] Population growth had slowed slightly, but it was still growing, and the Dutch were still expanding their colonies.
[172] So, they decided to continue on with their plan, completing the full star-shaped bastion ring around the city. But just 10 years after it was finished being constructed
# The End of an Era

[173] came what would be known as the year of disaster. A moment of attack from England and France that marked the end of the golden age. The population stopped growing and urban development froze.
[174] >> The upside of economic downturn was that there was a lot of greenery in inside Amsterdam.
[175] The burglar masters of Amsterdam, the Amsterdam government, they chose to make the best of it.
[176] And as they couldn't sell these as building plots, they uh chose to rent them as um garden plots. The area was called the Plantagia, which we translate as plantation, a big green area inside the city. The only remnant of this plantation area, this Plantagia, is the zoo called artistis, but the rest was parcel out and sold.
[177] Amsterdam's modern development has jumped the canal belt. But it was the golden age that forged the iconic foundation of the city.
[178] In the 19th century, after 200 years of stagnation, everything started again
[179] with the creation of the North Sea Canal, which gave Amsterdam a new link to the North Sea and a new connection to the world for bigger ships.
[180] So that gave a big impulse to the harbor.
[181] And at the same time the central station was created and they built central station on an artificial island in front of the harbor.
[182] >> The construction of this central station really cut off the city from that harbor.
[183] >> There were huge discussions concerning about the location of this station. So actually the Dutch government not the Amsterdam government took the decision to create central station over there.
[184] >> There have been many efforts over the years to make the city center more accessible.
[185] They created a breakthrough street strat city hall street which connects the now palace on dam square which used to be city hall to the new areas that were being developed beyond the city walls in the 19th century.
[186] So this street is from the from the 1880s. This is like a quite a nice ensemble of 19th century building by the Fronent architectural firm which was one of the best I think in Amsterdam's 19th century >> architecture scene.
[187] Yeah. >> But despite all of the changes and proposals, Amsterdam has still managed to keep its charm.
[188] >> If you're on the canals, you never have a line of sight that goes on for too long.
[189] And that makes it feel cozy. Because if you compare that to a place like Paris where they completely redesigned the city in the 19th century and it's very clear that it's not tailored to to a person but it has a different idea. But Amsterdam is still very very human.
[190] I have to say after making all of the videos that I have made about New York and about New Amsterdam and now being here and thinking about that, it's making me wonder what New York could have been like if the English hadn't taken over.
[191] could have been a very different city. Might have felt like this.
[192] >> For me, it's always a feeling of, you know, actually walking through history. The further you move away from the center, from the origins of the city, you move through history and you get more and more to contemporary city.
[193] >> And if you can't go walk physically through it, maybe now you can read it on its map.
[194] Huge thanks to Yap, Yakam, and Anmarie for helping me with this video. I've put links in the description to all of their work, so you can go check that out.
[195] And to the rest of you, thank you for watching.
[196] If you liked this, please hit the like button. Please subscribe to the channel if you haven't. We just hit 300,000, so that's really exciting. Share with your friends and family. It helps me a lot so that I can keep making these.
[197] And if you want to support me on my Patreon, that's also linked below. But either way, I'll see you guys in another video very soon.
[198] Peace.