[1] In late 2023, a new road tunnel under
[2] construction in the Indian Himalayas
[3] collapsed, trapping 41 workers inside
[4] for more than two weeks. It led to one
[5] of the most intense rescue operations in
[6] recent history. This emergency was a
[7] huge wakeup call. The investigation that
[8] followed unearthed multiple failings.
[9] Two years later, there was a
[10] breakthrough on a rail tunnel in the
[11] same region that also came close to
[12] tragedy. From ignoring warning signs to
[13] inadequate surveys, India's attempts to
[14] build new infrastructure through the
[15] world's biggest mountain range have at
[16] times been extremely dangerous. Now, the
[17] country's begun an even greater
[18] challenge, its longest ever tunnel. And
[19] once again, they've decided to build it
[20] here.
[21] Welcome to the Himalayas, the highest
[22] and newest mountain range on Earth.
[23] [snorts] But we're not in Nepal, Tibet,
[24] or even Bhutan. This is Utarakand in
[25] India. It's an area of breathtaking
[26] beauty known as the land of the gods.
[27] That's because it's home to the Chota
[28] Chardam, a series of Hindu temples and
[29] pilgrimage sites. Millions of pilgrims
[30] travel here every year, but let's just
[31] say their journeys aren't exactly
[32] straightforward. The existing
[33] roads are narrow with single lanes. They
[34] can become inaccessible in winter and
[35] the monsoon season. While more than half
[36] of the state is at high risk of
[37] landslides, which is why a 900 km
[38] highway project is underway to upgrade
[39] these routes and build better
[40] connections between the sites. By
[41] replacing them with two-lane highways
[42] and tunnels that can cut through some of
[43] the worst spots, travelers are going to
[44] be able to take much shorter, safer
[45] trips.
[46] Although it's a major piece of new
[47] infrastructure and obviously incredibly
[48] important to the region and Hindus
[49] across India, it's generally not the
[50] sort of thing that would make global
[51] news until the 12th of November 2023
[52] when the eyes of the world fell on this
[53] remote location around 100 miles from
[54] the state capital.
[55] >> The race is on to rescue construction
[56] workers who have been stuck since Sunday
[57] morning in India. As efforts ramp up to
[58] get 41 people out of this collapsed
[59] mountain tunnel,
[60] >> men were working inside the tunnel when
[61] the entrance gave way yesterday.
[62] >> A 4.5 km long tunnel under construction
[63] as part of the project caved in without
[64] warning. Dozens of workers were
[65] inside at the time and within an instant
[66] found themselves trapped. The collapse
[67] happened 270 m from the southern
[68] entrance at Silkiara. And because the
[69] tunnel had not yet been joined in the
[70] middle, their only escape route was
[71] blocked.
[72] They had just one connection to
[73] the outside world, a tiny emergency
[74] tunnel that provided them with air,
[75] food, medical supplies, and
[76] water. An international expert was
[77] called in to help. Meet Professor Arnold
[78] Dixs. He was at the time president of
[79] the International Tunneling and
[80] Underground Space Association. So I I
[81] got a call from the chief engineer of
[82] India on WhatsApp and uh he told me he
[83] had a problem. He sent me some pictures
[84] and he asked me what I would do and the
[85] next minute I was talking to the
[86] principal adviser to the prime minister
[87] of India and I was explaining why I
[88] thought what I thought would be a good
[89] idea and then they just asked me if I
[90] could pop over and give him a hand.
[91] Once Arnold arrived at the site and
[92] assessed the situation, it was time to
[93] create a rescue plan. An orga machine,
[94] basically a big drill, was brought in to
[95] dig an escape route. But it wasn't the
[96] only thing they tried. Several methods
[97] were executed simultaneously to increase
[98] their chances of success. We had a
[99] vertical drill coming from the surface
[100] down, which is like pushing a pin down
[101] through the mountain. We had a team
[102] assessing coming from the back. We had a
[103] team launching a TBM from the side. And
[104] we also had another team working on a
[105] very old-fashioned
[106] like a mining solution hugging the side
[107] of the tunnel and bracing it. And we ran
[108] all of them concurrently. Eventually it
[109] was the orga that got them out. Well,
[110] sort of. It broke down just before
[111] reaching the targets area. So a group of
[112] miners ended up digging the rest of the
[113] way using manual drills. And after 17
[114] terrifying days, the rescuers were able
[115] to free everyone in sight. Now, while it
[116] was a huge relief that no one was
[117] seriously hurt, this was a real warning
[118] sign about the dangers of building
[119] infrastructure in this area, and it's
[120] not the first sign there's been. Believe
[121] it or not, this is not the only tunnel
[122] in this area to have come close to
[123] disaster. Around 200 km to the
[124] southeast, another tunnel in the same
[125] state, this time for rail, broke through
[126] in April 2025,
[127] but only after some serious
[128] complications. When the tunnel boring
[129] machine reached the 5 km point, about a
[130] third of the way through, there was a
[131] sudden gush of water. At this moment,
[132] according to the project director, the
[133] tunnel was at risk of flooding
[134] or collapsing. But they managed to
[135] correct it by taking corrective
[136] measures. So, is it a coincidence that
[137] two tunnels under construction so close
[138] together either collapsed or came very
[139] close to it? Well, probably not because
[140] it turns out that carrying out this kind
[141] of work in these mountains in particular
[142] is exceptionally challenging.
[143] Firstly, there are sheer zones all over
[144] the place. That's where an area of
[145] higher strain is formed within the
[146] surrounding rock caused by tectonic
[147] activity.
[148] Tunneling in areas where they're present
[149] can lead to instability, ingress of
[150] water or mud, and even collapse.
[151] Then there's the type of rock that's
[152] being tunnneled through, which can vary
[153] greatly in terms of hardness. And it's
[154] not always possible to know exactly what
[155] kind of rock you're going to encounter.
[156] So this is the actual rock from
[157] the tunnel collapse. Even here sitting
[158] at my desk, it's very soft. It's old
[159] seabed um raised up thousands of meters
[160] into the air get pushed up very rapidly.
[161] So you you need to be very respectful of
[162] those dynamic conditions. You
[163] have to be uh reactive. So if you see
[164] it's not behaving how you expect,
[165] you have to react to that.
[166] Another challenge is working with
[167] materials that can change the further
[168] underground they are. Those rocks we see
[169] up on the surface. They're not behaving
[170] like that once you're deep in a
[171] mountain. They're they're actually
[172] behaving like a quite a different
[173] substance altogether. I attribute the
[174] mountains with a sense of life. I don't
[175] see them as like dead rock. actually see
[176] them as a living thing because actually
[177] they move and they squeeze and they they
[178] misbehave and they do all sorts of
[179] things. All of this means you have to be
[180] very careful when digging here or run
[181] the risk of problems like the ones we've
[182] seen. Building tunnels in a territory
[183] that's prone to earthquakes, floods, and
[184] landslides would be a tough job for
[185] anyone. But some of the presumed causes
[186] of the collapse were unfortunately
[187] man-made.
[188] One engineering geologist found evidence
[189] of poor workmanship and a lax approach
[190] to tunneling practices. An official
[191] report revealed defamations were not
[192] properly addressed and there was
[193] negligence from the contractor towards
[194] previous issues and these were plain to
[195] see as Arnold discovered when he first
[196] went into the tunnel after the collapse.
[197] So I've entered the portal and I'm now
[198] walking towards where the collapse is
[199] still occurring. I count
[200] 21 prior collapses. I can see the scars
[201] as I'm walking down through the tunnel.
[202] And so I realize this hasn't just
[203] happened out of the blue. There's
[204] something systemic wrong. No one's
[205] thought about changing the method or no
[206] one's thought about changing the profile
[207] or no one's thought about changing the
[208] um the support system. It was awful.
[209] They might have experienced difficulties
[210] lately, but tunnelers in this country
[211] have had some success in the past. India
[212] has already built a 9 km long road
[213] tunnel in the Himalayas, bypassing the
[214] notorious Rotang Pass. With an altitude
[215] of over 10,000 ft, the atal tunnel has
[216] cut travel times between the town of
[217] Manally and this pair of valleys by more
[218] than 4 hours. But even this had its
[219] challenges. It meant digging
[220] through a fault zone, and there were
[221] points where up to 8,000 L of water a
[222] minute were coming into the tunnel. It
[223] all meant they had to be really, really
[224] careful. One 600 m stretch took them 4
[225] years to get through.
[226] The fact there have been these scary
[227] moments on multiple projects hasn't been
[228] enough to stop India building any more
[229] tunnels into the Himalayas. In fact,
[230] it's quite the opposite. Further to the
[231] northwest, in a region that's even more
[232] hostile for several reasons, there's
[233] another 19 projects in the pipeline.
[234] We're talking about Lark and the Union
[235] territories of Jammu and Kashmir, which
[236] has been the subject of disputes between
[237] India, Pakistan, and China for decades.
[238] It's an area that's understandably not
[239] well connected because building those
[240] connections is kind of tricky. Traveling
[241] between these places means taking one of
[242] these long winding roads, all of which
[243] are pretty treacherous. Like the
[244] Ziggilla Pass, for example, a trip along
[245] the worst part of it can take up to 4
[246] hours, which is why they're now building
[247] this, the Zojilla tunnel. Under
[248] construction almost 12,000 ft above sea
[249] level, it'll bring that journey time
[250] down to just 15 minutes. And because
[251] it's subterranean, the road can be used
[252] all year round. If that wasn't already
[253] impressive, this is also set to be the
[254] longest tunnel ever built in India,
[255] stretching to 13 kilometers. So far,
[256] there have been no major catastrophes,
[257] which could be to do with the tunneling
[258] technique they've chosen. Contractor,
[259] Mega Engineering, and Infrastructures
[260] opted for what's called the new Austrian
[261] tunneling method. It's where the
[262] strength of the surrounding material is
[263] utilized as much as possible with ground
[264] stability monitored continuously.
[265] Blasting is involved, but support is
[266] provided in the form of rock bolts,
[267] steel ribs or mesh, and shockrete. If
[268] you've never heard of that, it's a type
[269] of concrete that's sprayed onto the
[270] tunnel walls immediately after
[271] excavation. The tunnel is then finished
[272] off with a waterproof lining followed by
[273] another layer of concrete. Now, we
[274] should clarify here that this method
[275] isn't unique to the Zodilla tunnel. In
[276] fact, it's been chosen for projects
[277] across the region, including on the one
[278] that collapsed. But as Arnold said,
[279] being able to adjust the approach as and
[280] when problems occur is all part of it,
[281] which perhaps wasn't done effectively in
[282] the past. Other tunneling techniques
[283] have been deployed as well, including
[284] eight cut and cover tunnels through the
[285] more low-lying areas. These are made by
[286] first digging a trench in the ground,
[287] constructing the tunnel lining inside,
[288] and then back filling over the top.
[289] Meanwhile, in the main tunnel, three
[290] vertical shafts up to 500 meters in
[291] height are being placed along it to
[292] provide ventilation. The first has
[293] already had a literal breakthrough. A
[294] pilot tunnel was successfully completed
[295] in July 2025, which will now be
[296] gradually enlarged until it reaches the
[297] full 7.5 m diameter.
[298] But guess what? Despite all the care
[299] that's been taken, despite all that
[300] high-tech equipment, things haven't gone
[301] as smoothly as everyone would have
[302] liked. Although it's now more than 40%
[303] complete, this tunnel has had its fair
[304] share of obstacles, which explains why
[305] the original deadline of December 2026
[306] has now been pushed back by 4 years.
[307] [snorts] Back to the Silkier Tunnel, and
[308] 2025 has seen the news take a more
[309] positive turn. In April, the two
[310] ends finally met in the middle, bringing
[311] excavation work to an end. And yet,
[312] despite that milestone, there's still a
[313] long way to go until it's completely
[314] finished. Still, after what happened,
[315] having to wait a little bit longer for
[316] it to open is nothing compared to what
[317] might have been. It's insane.
[318] Like, I can't believe it's true, but it
[319] is true. And we did perform a bit of a
[320] miracle. I think I know when I I met a
[321] whole lot of the kids afterwards, cuz
[322] they're just kids. I was like, "Oh my
[323] god, we really have given 41 people a
[324] second chance at life."
[325] We've seen tunnels built through similar
[326] terrain before without serious
[327] incidents. These attempts show
[328] us that building infrastructure in the
[329] Himalayas is more difficult than many
[330] could imagine. With those calamities now
[331] in the past, India must prove that it
[332] can tame this unforgiving landscape by
[333] taking the stakes even higher. Let's
[334] just hope the mountains don't have other
[335] ideas.
[336] >> [snorts]
[337] >> Don't forget that we're raising
[338] awareness of construction's mental
[339] health crisis and supporting charities
[340] in this space through our get
[341] construction initiative. You can learn
[342] more and find links to support over at
[343] getconstructionalking.org.
[344] And as always guys, if you enjoyed this
[345] video and you want to get more from the
[346] definitive video channel for
[347] construction, make sure you're
[348] subscribed to the B1M.