[9] Two years later, there was a
[10] breakthrough on a rail tunnel in the
[11] same region that also came close to
[12] tragedy. From ignoring warning signs to

[29] pilgrimage sites. Millions of pilgrims
[30] travel here every year, but let's just
[31] say their journeys aren't exactly
[32] straightforward. The existing

[46] Although it's a major piece of new
[47] infrastructure and obviously incredibly
[48] important to the region and Hindus
[49] across India, it's generally not the
[50] sort of thing that would make global
[51] news until the 12th of November 2023
[52] when the eyes of the world fell on this
[53] remote location around 100 miles from
[54] the state capital.

[84] and he asked me what I would do and the
[85] next minute I was talking to the
[86] principal adviser to the prime minister
[87] of India and I was explaining why I
[88] thought what I thought would be a good
[89] idea and then they just asked me if I
[90] could pop over and give him a hand.

[120] not the first sign there's been. Believe
[121] it or not, this is not the only tunnel
[122] in this area to have come close to
[123] disaster. Around 200 km to the
[124] southeast, another tunnel in the same
[125] state, this time for rail, broke through
[126] in April 2025,

[134] or collapsing. But they managed to
[135] correct it by taking corrective
[136] measures. So, is it a coincidence that
[137] two tunnels under construction so close
[138] together either collapsed or came very
[139] close to it? Well, probably not because
[140] it turns out that carrying out this kind
[141] of work in these mountains in particular
[142] is exceptionally challenging.

[168] underground they are. Those rocks we see
[169] up on the surface. They're not behaving
[170] like that once you're deep in a
[171] mountain. They're they're actually
[172] behaving like a quite a different
[173] substance altogether. I attribute the
[174] mountains with a sense of life. I don't

[179] things. All of this means you have to be
[180] very careful when digging here or run
[181] the risk of problems like the ones we've
[182] seen. Building tunnels in a territory
[183] that's prone to earthquakes, floods, and
[184] landslides would be a tough job for
[185] anyone. But some of the presumed causes
[186] of the collapse were unfortunately
[187] man-made.

[226] The fact there have been these scary
[227] moments on multiple projects hasn't been
[228] enough to stop India building any more
[229] tunnels into the Himalayas. In fact,
[230] it's quite the opposite. Further to the

[243] are pretty treacherous. Like the
[244] Ziggilla Pass, for example, a trip along
[245] the worst part of it can take up to 4
[246] hours, which is why they're now building
[247] this, the Zojilla tunnel. Under

[267] steel ribs or mesh, and shockrete. If
[268] you've never heard of that, it's a type
[269] of concrete that's sprayed onto the
[270] tunnel walls immediately after
[271] excavation. The tunnel is then finished
[272] off with a waterproof lining followed by
[273] another layer of concrete. Now, we
[274] should clarify here that this method
[275] isn't unique to the Zodilla tunnel. In

[292] provide ventilation. The first has
[293] already had a literal breakthrough. A
[294] pilot tunnel was successfully completed
[295] in July 2025, which will now be
[296] gradually enlarged until it reaches the
[297] full 7.5 m diameter.

[317] might have been. It's insane.
[318] Like, I can't believe it's true, but it
[319] is true. And we did perform a bit of a

[321] whole lot of the kids afterwards, cuz
[322] they're just kids. I was like, "Oh my
[323] god, we really have given 41 people a
[324] second chance at life."
[325] We've seen tunnels built through similar
[326] terrain before without serious
[327] incidents. These attempts show
[328] us that building infrastructure in the
[329] Himalayas is more difficult than many
[330] could imagine. With those calamities now
[331] in the past, India must prove that it
[332] can tame this unforgiving landscape by
[333] taking the stakes even higher. Let's
