[1] Okay, so another Dubai video.
[2] Mega projects check, 20 billion US
[3] dollars, yeah, seems about right. Okay,
[4] so what's this then? It's got to be the
[5] world's biggest something, maybe an
[6] island.
[7] Oh.
[8] A sewer?
[9] Oh. Oh. Okay.
[10] Well,
[11] it turns out the blingiest city on Earth
[12] has a plumbing problem, and it's one
[13] that is
[14] taking to the streets.
[15] So, in an attempt to avoid being up a
[16] creek without a paddle, the extravagant
[17] Emirates is splashing its cash on a mega
[18] project that you won't see on the cover
[19] of a tourism brochure, and one you
[20] definitely wouldn't want to park your
[21] Ferrari next to.
[22] Let's take a trip back to the naughties.
[23] Who remembers this?
[24] Here's all the poop trucks all lined up.
[25] How much money?
[26] 10,000 gallons each. It's the
[27] flatteringly named Dubai poop snake, and
[28] it's the rather less glamorous
[29] consequence of the city's crowning
[30] achievement.
[31] In 2010, Dubai burst onto the global
[32] stage with the completion of this
[33] mahoosive icon, an extraordinary
[34] accomplishment blending technical skill
[35] and breathtaking ambition.
[36] Dubai had arrived, baby, and this
[37] Titanic tower ushered in a new era of
[38] rapid urban development, which experts
[39] refer to as more is more and less is
[40] snore. But, growing at such light speed
[41] had its ups and downs, underground to be
[42] precise.
[43] The legend goes that this vast tower
[44] wasn't connected to the city's sewage
[45] system, and instead needed a constant
[46] supply of tankers to carry away its uh
[47] waste. That's not entirely correct, but
[48] the truth isn't much better. In reality,
[49] the Burj Khalifa was plumbed in, but the
[50] sewage system for the entire downtown
[51] core was already over capacity and
[52] building the world's tallest skyscraper
[53] there was just the
[54] cherry on top.
[55] Thousands of sewage trucks were indeed
[56] called in to take receipts of these
[57] unwanted deliveries until the system
[58] caught up. Today, the Burj Khalifa makes
[59] use of a sophisticated sewage treatment
[60] system that cleans that and pumps it
[61] back out through fountains for the
[62] enjoyment of everyone at ground level.
[63] But while the Burj Khalifa might have
[64] cleaned up his act, the problem for the
[65] rest of the city has only gotten worse.
[66] The Palm Jumeirah, another of the city's
[67] iconic mega projects, might contain some
[68] of the most exclusive real estate in the
[69] world, but it's not immune from Dubai's
[70] problematic pong. In 2018, raw sewage
[71] was spotted flowing onto the road on the
[72] eastern crescent of the island. It had
[73] come from this, a temporary sewage
[74] treatment plant that was overloaded.
[75] According to one eyewitness, "It's been
[76] like this for about 6 months and it
[77] smells. Sewage has been lying on the
[78] road and is even splattered on the blue
[79] construction boards. And this wasn't a
[80] one-off. In 2019, residents on the Palm
[81] Jumeirah complained of chronic issues
[82] with plumbing, a persistent bad smell,
[83] blocked sewage pipes, and broken water
[84] supply to their homes."
[85] But the most dramatic impact of the
[86] city's poor plumbing came in 2024.
[87] The UAE was struck by flash floods after
[88] it suffered the heaviest rains since
[89] records began. Roads turned into
[90] rivers. The tarmac flooded at Dubai
[91] International Airport. The floods
[92] overwhelmed the city's drainage system
[93] and there were reports across the
[94] Emirates of sewage mixing with flood
[95] water.
[96] But in case you're thinking of swapping
[97] your Lamborghini for a dinghy, then
[98] don't worry because a plan is a foot. In
[99] 2023, the Executive Council of Dubai
[100] approved construction of the Dubai
[101] Strategic Sewage Tunnels. A massive plan
[102] that's going to give this city a modern
[103] and sophisticated sewer system that'll
[104] keep it regular for the next century.
[105] It's designed around two deep-level
[106] tunnels, each one serving a different
[107] part of this city. The larger of the two
[108] is going to run for 50 km through the
[109] most densely populated areas, Bur Dubai,
[110] Downtown, and the Southern Growth
[111] Corridor. Along the way, waste is uh fed
[112] into the main tunnel through a 10 km
[113] network of link pipes.
[114] The tunnel will gradually widen from 3.5
[115] to 6.5 m over its length as its well, as
[116] its workflow is increased. Once waste
[117] falls into the tunnel, the call of
[118] nature is going to be assisted by well,
[119] nature. Built at an angle, the tunnel
[120] will gradually drop by a depth
[121] of 90 m, allowing gravity to keep things
[122] moving. Eventually, everything is going
[123] to arrive here at a new pumping station
[124] in Jebel Ali, where the cargo is going
[125] to be lifted the final few meters into a
[126] sewage treatment plant before being
[127] cleaned and then reused. The second half
[128] of the system serves the Deira district,
[129] the area that houses Dubai International
[130] Airport and many of the city's famous
[131] souqs. Here, a shorter 25 km tunnel is
[132] going to run from Palm Deira to a new
[133] facility here at Al Warsan.
[134] Construction is split into four
[135] different phases. The first contracts
[136] were signed with construction companies
[137] in 2025 and no official completion
[138] date's been set, but it's likely to be
[139] finished in the early 2030s.
[140] At an estimated 21.8 billion US dollars,
[141] it won't come cheap, but it is going to
[142] give Dubai the gold standard of waste
[143] management, the Rolls-Royce of sewers,
[144] if you like.
[145] I wonder what the chances of me owning a
[146] Rolls-Royce is.
[147] Nah, it's got more to it than that. Ah,
[148] easy. Model stochastic lifetime earnings
[149] discounted to present value minus fixed
[150] outgoing, run a Monte Carlo against
[151] phantom appreciation and maintenance,
[152] integrate the outcomes where surplus
[153] exceeds cost, and there is my
[154] probability.
[155] Did you follow that? Well, if you
[156] didn't, then you need today's video
[157] sponsor, Brilliant. It's a great
[158] learning platform that I use all the
[159] time to brush up on stuff I really
[160] should know, like calculus or other
[161] subjects I'm just curious about, like
[162] advanced geometry. If you're anything
[163] like me, you'll love the idea of
[164] challenging yourself to learn something
[165] new, but find the idea of sitting down
[166] with a textbook incredibly dull. That's
[167] exactly what Brilliant is built for.
[168] It's there to help you learn in a way
[169] that suits you. Courses are split up
[170] into small modules that you can dip in
[171] and out of or binge for a whole evening.
[172] This course on likeness and probability
[173] is great because it takes something that
[174] feels intuitive and gives you a much
[175] more rigorous understanding of it. It
[176] starts off with the most basic form of
[177] predictions, and before you know it,
[178] you're into really complex compound
[179] probabilities. Which reminds me, I
[180] should be getting my Rolls-Royce in
[181] No.
[182] Never mind. Don't worry about me though.
[183] Check out the link below or scan the QR
[184] code on screen to try Brilliant for free
[185] for a full 30 days. And as a viewer of
[186] the B1M, you can also get yourself 20%
[187] off an annual premium subscription. I
[188] really rate it and you'll be doing us a
[189] big favor as well, though I can't make
[190] you any promises about luxury supercars.
[191] Now, where were we?
[192] Oh, yeah.
[193] Sewers.
[194] The design is similar to London's new
[195] mega sewer, which opened for business in
[196] 2025.
[197] The Thames Tideway Tunnel runs for 25 km
[198] from west to east over 60 m beneath the
[199] city.
[200] When the Dubai strategic sewage tunnels
[201] are complete, they'll replace much of
[202] the city's existing infrastructure while
[203] increasing its wastewater capacity by
[204] 700% and managing some 20 million cubic
[205] meters of waste every day.
[206] But, if it's such a good idea, then why
[207] is it taking so long? And what's there
[208] at the minute? Well, first, we've got to
[209] rewind a bit.
[210] It's hard to overstate just how much
[211] Dubai has transformed since the early
[212] 2000s. The Burj Khalifa was just the
[213] latest in a string of spectacles
[214] designed to transform this place from a
[215] sleepy trading post into a global
[216] destination and crucially in doing so,
[217] win itself off its dependency on oil.
[218] And in case you didn't get the memo, it
[219] worked. In just 11 years from 2008,
[220] Dubai's population doubled. And in the
[221] period between 2003 and 2023,
[222] >>
[223] >> its economy quadrupled.
[224] Huge sums of money were spent on lavish
[225] baubles as this place became
[226] [clears throat] the glitzy,
[227] love-it-or-hate-it city that everyone
[228] can see today. But, as real estate
[229] agents in questionable suits made their
[230] fortunes, the city was becoming a victim
[231] of its own success. Power cuts became
[232] common as the grid struggled with
[233] demand. As motorways were thrown up to
[234] accommodate the ballooning population,
[235] neighborhoods became cut off, creating
[236] an urban planner's vision of hell. And
[237] of course, the problems weren't just
[238] above ground.
[239] Now, before we go any further with
[240] today's video, we need to stop
[241] everything because I have got some very
[242] big news that I am finally allowed to
[243] share. Last year, Penguin Random House
[244] asked me if I'd like to write a book. I
[245] said, "Yes." I've written the book.
[246] And here it is. It is called Megabuilds:
[247] 10 Colossal Construction Projects That
[248] Will Change Our World. Over the last 10
[249] years, I have had a front row seat on
[250] this planet's most incredible
[251] construction projects, and they are all
[252] in here. I've written about them. I've
[253] gone deeper than I've ever gone before
[254] in any video, story, or any kind of like
[255] long-form documentary. This is behind
[256] the scenes. It's up close and personal.
[257] It meets the teams. It's the human
[258] stories. It's the engineering in detail.
[259] It's my personal experiences and some of
[260] the calamities I've had along the way
[261] getting up close with these projects. I
[262] have really enjoyed writing this. Some
[263] of my mates have been like, "Oh, nice.
[264] Who Who ghostwrote that for you?" No
[265] one. I can't afford a fancy ghostwriter.
[266] Me. I wrote this. Every single word of
[267] this has come from my head into my
[268] laptop and then into this book all for
[269] your reading pleasure. Guys, I never
[270] thought I could write a book, but I have
[271] and obviously I'm biased, but I actually
[272] kind of think it's quite good. It is
[273] available to pre-order now. The link is
[274] below. Pre-ordering is incredibly
[275] important. Basically, my entire future
[276] happiness depends on you pre-ordering
[277] this book. So guys, if you love the B1M,
[278] if you love these stories, if you love
[279] learning more about construction in a
[280] down-to-earth way that's easy to
[281] understand and could be read by anyone,
[282] go and pre-order my book Megabuilds
[283] today.
[284] It wasn't that there was a total lack of
[285] plumbing. There was just no coherent
[286] system. By the mid-noughties, Dubai had
[287] over 1,200 km of sewer pipes, but those
[288] pipes all existed in
[289] small localized networks that had been
[290] built ad hoc rather than in response to
[291] a citywide strategy. There was also
[292] another reason why everything was
[293] struggling. Instead of using gravity to
[294] wash the effluent downhill for
[295] treatment, they relied on a network of
[296] over 150 pumping stations to keep waste
[297] flowing through the pipes. It's a
[298] massively inefficient way to run the
[299] system requiring huge amounts of energy
[300] to operate. Today, 30% of the city's
[301] carbon emissions come from the power
[302] needed to keep these stations running.
[303] But more importantly, they require
[304] constant maintenance. As residents of
[305] the Palm Jumeirah discovered, as soon as
[306] one malfunctions, the consequences make
[307] themselves known pretty quickly.
[308] As the system struggled to cope, tankers
[309] were often called upon to fill the gap
[310] when it was caught short. In 2013, 30%
[311] of all the waste arriving at this plant
[312] in Jebel Ali was delivered by road. The
[313] poop snake was back.
[314] Cues were so bad that drivers were
[315] sometimes left waiting up to 24 hours to
[316] deposit their load, while others took
[317] matters into their own hands. After an
[318] initial nervous few minutes, they told
[319] us that dumping is routine.
[320] In those days, if you were lucky enough
[321] to stay in one of Dubai's seafront
[322] hotels, you might literally have had to
[323] stay there. The overflow caused by
[324] tankers dumping waste caused beaches to
[325] be closed as sewage clogged up on the
[326] shoreline.
[327] Now, granted, this is all pretty gross.
[328] But in case you think we're being unfair
[329] here, I want to reassure you that I'm
[330] not just trying to dunk on Dubai. This
[331] isn't a story of a city that was too
[332] busy lavishing money on vanity projects
[333] to get the basics of its infrastructure
[334] right. That period of growth from the
[335] mid-noughties up to today was faster and
[336] more dramatic than anyone could have
[337] predicted. And how can you plan and
[338] build a sophisticated infrastructure
[339] network when you don't know what the
[340] next 5 years is going to look like?
[341] >>
[342] >> Remember the Tideway Tunnel we mentioned
[343] earlier? That's designed as an overflow
[344] system to supplement London's venerable
[345] Victorian sewage network, which opened
[346] all the way back in 1865.
[347] In the 1850s, London was in a similar
[348] position to Dubai now. It was
[349] experiencing extraordinary
[350] population growth, and its waste
[351] disposal system, aka the River Thames,
[352] was struggling to keep up.
[353] In fact, it took a particularly hot and
[354] dry summer in 1858, known as the Great
[355] Stink, for the government to finally
[356] act.
[357] The city was engulfed such a foul stench
[358] that the curtains in Parliament
[359] were soaked with lime chloride to try
[360] and hide the smell.
[361] The sewer built over the next 6 years by
[362] Joseph Bazalgette was hailed as a marvel
[363] of civic engineering, but more
[364] importantly, it signaled a turning point
[365] in the city's evolution.
[366] It's not just the sewer Dubai is fixing
[367] up. Back in 2021, the city's ruler,
[368] Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid Al Maktoum,
[369] unveiled Dubai 2040, a huge plan to
[370] fundamentally rewire the city and
[371] transform it from a builder's yard with
[372] Bugattis into a modern planned
[373] metropolis.
[374] Those isolated pockets hemmed in by
[375] motorways are going to give way to five
[376] new city centers, all with the amenities
[377] that residents need within short walking
[378] distances. Three existing areas are
[379] being redeveloped into mini city
[380] centers, and two new ones are being
[381] built from scratch.
[382] 680 million US dollars is being
[383] spent on 8 million square meters of
[384] green corridors for pedestrians and
[385] cyclists, and a new metro system is
[386] going to put half the city within 800
[387] meters of a station, making public
[388] transport a viable way to get around.
[389] Dubai's strategic sewer tunnels may not
[390] be the most glamorous or even most
[391] excitingly named of construction mega
[392] projects, but they are incredibly
[393] important. This city is world-famous for
[394] what it's built above the ground, but as
[395] is so often it's what's happening under
[396] the ground on projects that are out of
[397] sight, out of mind, and led often by
[398] unsung heroes that makes what we see
[399] above ground happen.
[400] Today's video was sponsored by
[401] Brilliant. Don't forget that you guys
[402] can learn for free on Brilliant for a
[403] full 30 days by going to
[404] brilliant.org/theB1M,
[405] scanning the QR code on screen, or
[406] clicking the link in the description.
[407] Brilliant is also giving our viewers 20%
[408] off an annual premium subscription,
[409] which means you'll get unlimited daily
[410] access to everything on Brilliant. And
[411] as always guys, if you enjoyed this
[412] video and you want to get more from the
[413] definitive video channel for
[414] construction, push that flush button. I
[415] mean, hit that subscribe button.