[15] So, in an attempt to avoid being up a
[16] creek without a paddle, the extravagant
[17] Emirates is splashing its cash on a mega
[18] project that you won't see on the cover
[19] of a tourism brochure, and one you
[20] definitely wouldn't want to park your
[21] Ferrari next to.

[105] It's designed around two deep-level
[106] tunnels, each one serving a different
[107] part of this city. The larger of the two
[108] is going to run for 50 km through the
[109] most densely populated areas, Bur Dubai,
[110] Downtown, and the Southern Growth
[111] Corridor. Along the way, waste is uh fed
[112] into the main tunnel through a 10 km
[113] network of link pipes.

[182] Never mind. Don't worry about me though.
[183] Check out the link below or scan the QR
[184] code on screen to try Brilliant for free
[185] for a full 30 days. And as a viewer of
[186] the B1M, you can also get yourself 20%
[187] off an annual premium subscription. I

[228] can see today. But, as real estate
[229] agents in questionable suits made their
[230] fortunes, the city was becoming a victim
[231] of its own success. Power cuts became
[232] common as the grid struggled with
[233] demand. As motorways were thrown up to

[274] below. Pre-ordering is incredibly
[275] important. Basically, my entire future
[276] happiness depends on you pre-ordering
[277] this book. So guys, if you love the B1M,
[278] if you love these stories, if you love
[279] learning more about construction in a
[280] down-to-earth way that's easy to
[281] understand and could be read by anyone,
[282] go and pre-order my book Megabuilds
[283] today.
[284] It wasn't that there was a total lack of
[285] plumbing. There was just no coherent
[286] system. By the mid-noughties, Dubai had
[287] over 1,200 km of sewer pipes, but those
[288] pipes all existed in
[289] small localized networks that had been
[290] built ad hoc rather than in response to
[291] a citywide strategy. There was also

[320] In those days, if you were lucky enough
[321] to stay in one of Dubai's seafront
[322] hotels, you might literally have had to
[323] stay there. The overflow caused by
[324] tankers dumping waste caused beaches to
[325] be closed as sewage clogged up on the
[326] shoreline.

[328] But in case you think we're being unfair
[329] here, I want to reassure you that I'm
[330] not just trying to dunk on Dubai. This
[331] isn't a story of a city that was too
[332] busy lavishing money on vanity projects
[333] to get the basics of its infrastructure
[334] right. That period of growth from the

[382] 680 million US dollars is being
[383] spent on 8 million square meters of
[384] green corridors for pedestrians and
[385] cyclists, and a new metro system is
[386] going to put half the city within 800
[387] meters of a station, making public
[388] transport a viable way to get around.
[389] Dubai's strategic sewer tunnels may not
[390] be the most glamorous or even most
[391] excitingly named of construction mega
[392] projects, but they are incredibly
[393] important. This city is world-famous for
[394] what it's built above the ground, but as
[395] is so often it's what's happening under
[396] the ground on projects that are out of
[397] sight, out of mind, and led often by
[398] unsung heroes that makes what we see
[399] above ground happen.
