# New Project

[1] Okay, so another Dubai video.
[2] Mega projects check, 20 billion US dollars, yeah, seems about right.
[3] Okay, so what's this then?
[4] It's got to be the world's biggest something, maybe an island.
[5] Oh.
[6] A sewer?
[7] Oh. Oh. Okay.
[8] Well, it turns out the blingiest city on Earth has a plumbing problem, and it's one that is taking to the streets.
[9] So, in an attempt to avoid being up a creek without a paddle, the extravagant Emirates is splashing its cash on a mega project that you won't see on the cover of a tourism brochure,
[10] and one you definitely wouldn't want to park your Ferrari next to.
[11] Let's take a trip back to the naughties.
# The Poop Snake

[12] Who remembers this?
[13] Here's all the poop trucks all lined up.
[14] How much money?
[15] 10,000 gallons each.
[16] It's the flatteringly named Dubai poop snake, and it's the rather less glamorous consequence of the city's crowning achievement.
[17] In 2010, Dubai burst onto the global stage with the completion of this mahoosive icon, an extraordinary accomplishment blending technical skill and breathtaking ambition.
[18] Dubai had arrived, baby, and this Titanic tower ushered in a new era of rapid urban development, which experts refer to as more is more and less is snore.
[19] But, growing at such light speed had its ups and downs, underground to be precise.
[20] The legend goes that this vast tower wasn't connected to the city's sewage system, and instead needed a constant supply of tankers to carry away its uh waste. That's not entirely correct,
[21] but the truth isn't much better.
[22] In reality, the Burj Khalifa was plumbed in, but the sewage system for the entire downtown core was already over capacity and building the world's tallest skyscraper there was just the cherry on top.
[23] Thousands of sewage trucks were indeed called in to take receipts of these unwanted deliveries until the system caught up.
[24] Today, the Burj Khalifa makes use of a sophisticated sewage treatment system that cleans that and pumps it back out through fountains for the enjoyment of everyone at ground level.
[25] But while the Burj Khalifa might have cleaned up his act, the problem for the rest of the city has only gotten worse.
[26] The Palm Jumeirah, another of the city's iconic mega projects, might contain some of the most exclusive real estate in the world, but it's not immune from Dubai's problematic pong.
[27] In 2018, raw sewage was spotted flowing onto the road on the eastern crescent of the island.
[28] It had come from this, a temporary sewage treatment plant that was overloaded.
[29] According to one eyewitness, "It's been like this for about 6 months and it smells.
[30] Sewage has been lying on the road and is even splattered on the blue construction boards. And this wasn't
[31] a one-off.
[32] In 2019, residents on the Palm Jumeirah complained of chronic issues with plumbing, a persistent bad smell, blocked sewage pipes, and broken water supply to their homes."
[33] But the most dramatic impact of the city's poor plumbing came in 2024.
[34] The UAE was struck by flash floods after it suffered the heaviest rains since records began.
[35] Roads turned into rivers.
[36] The tarmac flooded at Dubai International Airport.
[37] The floods overwhelmed the city's drainage system and there were reports across the Emirates of sewage mixing with flood water.
[38] But in case you're thinking of swapping your Lamborghini for a dinghy, then don't worry because a plan is a foot.
[39] In 2023, the Executive Council of Dubai approved construction of the Dubai Strategic Sewage Tunnels.
[40] A massive plan that's going to give this city a modern and sophisticated sewer system that'll keep it regular for the next century.
[41] It's designed around two deep-level tunnels, each one serving a different part of this city.
# The Solution

[42] The larger of the two is going to run for 50 km through the most densely populated areas, Bur Dubai, Downtown, and the Southern Growth Corridor.
[43] Along the way, waste is uh fed into the main tunnel through a 10 km network of link pipes.
[44] The tunnel will gradually widen from 3.5 to 6.5 m over its length as its well, as its workflow is increased.
[45] Once waste falls into the tunnel, the call of nature is going to be assisted by well, nature.
[46] Built at an angle, the tunnel will gradually drop by a depth of 90 m, allowing gravity to keep things moving.
[47] Eventually, everything is going to arrive here at a new pumping station in Jebel Ali, where the cargo is going to be lifted the final few meters into a sewage treatment plant before being cleaned and then reused.
[48] The second half of the system serves the Deira district, the area that houses Dubai International Airport and many of the city's famous souqs.
[49] Here, a shorter 25 km tunnel is going to run from Palm Deira to a new facility here at Al Warsan.
[50] Construction is split into four different phases. The first contracts were signed with construction companies in 2025 and no official completion date's been set, but it's likely to be finished in the early 2030s.
[51] At an estimated 21.8 billion US dollars, it won't come cheap, but it is going to give Dubai the gold standard of waste management, the Rolls-Royce of sewers, if you like.
[52] I wonder what the chances of me owning a Rolls-Royce is.
[53] Nah, it's got more to it than that.
[54] Ah, easy. Model stochastic lifetime earnings discounted to present value minus fixed outgoing, run a Monte Carlo against phantom appreciation and maintenance, integrate the outcomes where surplus exceeds cost, and there is my probability.
[55] Did you follow that?
[56] Well, if you didn't, then you need today's video sponsor, Brilliant.
[57] It's a great learning platform that I use all the time to brush up on stuff I really should know, like calculus or other subjects I'm just curious about, like advanced geometry.
[58] If you're anything like me, you'll love the idea of challenging yourself to learn something new, but find the idea of sitting down with a textbook incredibly dull.
[59] That's exactly what Brilliant is built for.
[60] It's there to help you learn in a way that suits you. Courses are split up into small modules that you can dip in and out of or binge for a whole evening.
[61] This course on likeness and probability is great because it takes something that feels intuitive and gives you a much more rigorous understanding of it.
[62] It starts off with the most basic form of predictions, and before you know it, you're into really complex compound probabilities. Which reminds me,
[63] I should be getting my Rolls-Royce in No.
[64] Never mind. Don't worry about me though.
[65] Check out the link below or scan the QR code on screen to try Brilliant for free for a full 30 days.
[66] And as a viewer of the B1M, you can also get yourself 20% off an annual premium subscription.
[67] I really rate it and you'll be doing us a big favor as well, though I can't make you any promises about luxury supercars.
[68] Now, where were we?
[69] Oh, yeah.
[70] Sewers.
[71] The design is similar to London's new mega sewer, which opened for business in 2025.
[72] The Thames Tideway Tunnel runs for 25 km from west to east over 60 m beneath the city.
[73] When the Dubai strategic sewage tunnels are complete, they'll replace much of the city's existing infrastructure while increasing its wastewater capacity by 700% and managing some 20 million cubic meters of waste every day.
# How Did We Get Here?

[74] But, if it's such a good idea, then why is it taking so long? And what's there at the minute?
[75] Well, first, we've got to rewind a bit.
[76] It's hard to overstate just how much Dubai has transformed since the early 2000s.
[77] The Burj Khalifa was just the latest in a string of spectacles designed to transform this place from a sleepy trading post into a global destination and crucially in doing so, win itself off its dependency on oil.
[78] And in case you didn't get the memo, it worked.
[79] In just 11 years from 2008, Dubai's population doubled.
[80] And in the period between 2003 and 2023, >> >> its economy quadrupled.
[81] Huge sums of money were spent on lavish baubles as this place became [clears throat] the glitzy, love-it-or-hate-it city that everyone can see today.
[82] But, as real estate agents in questionable suits made their fortunes, the city was becoming a victim of its own success.
[83] Power cuts became common as the grid struggled with demand.
[84] As motorways were thrown up to accommodate the ballooning population, neighborhoods became cut off, creating an urban planner's vision of hell.
[85] And of course, the problems weren't just above ground.
[86] Now, before we go any further with today's video, we need to stop everything because I have got some very big news that I am finally allowed to share.
[87] Last year, Penguin Random House asked me if I'd like to write a book.
[88] I said, "Yes." I've written the book.
[89] And here it is. It is called Megabuilds:
[90] 10 Colossal Construction Projects That Will Change Our World. Over the last 10 years,
[91] I have had a front row seat on this planet's most incredible construction projects, and they are all in here.
[92] I've written about them. I've gone deeper than I've ever gone before in any video, story, or any kind of like long-form documentary. This is behind the scenes. It's up close and personal.
[93] It meets the teams.
[94] It's the human stories. It's the engineering in detail.
[95] It's my personal experiences and some of the calamities I've had along the way getting up close with these projects.
[96] I have really enjoyed writing this.
[97] Some of my mates have been like, "Oh, nice. Who Who ghostwrote that for you?" No one. I can't afford a fancy ghostwriter.
[98] Me.
[99] I wrote this. Every single word of this has come from my head into my laptop and then into this book all for your reading pleasure.
[100] Guys, I never thought I could write a book, but I have and obviously I'm biased, but I actually kind of think it's quite good.
[101] It is available to pre-order now. The link is below.
[102] Pre-ordering is incredibly important.
[103] Basically, my entire future happiness depends on you pre-ordering this book.
[104] So guys, if you love the B1M, if you love these stories, if you love learning more about construction in a down-to-earth way that's easy to understand and could be read by anyone, go and pre-order my book Megabuilds today.
[105] It wasn't that there was a total lack of plumbing.
[106] There was just no coherent system.
[107] By the mid-noughties, Dubai had over 1,200 km of sewer pipes, but those pipes all existed in small localized networks that had been built ad hoc rather than in response to a citywide strategy.
[108] There was also another reason why everything was struggling. Instead of using gravity to wash the effluent downhill for treatment, they relied on a network of over 150 pumping stations to keep waste flowing through the pipes.
# Sub Optimal

[109] It's a massively inefficient way to run the system requiring huge amounts of energy to operate.
[110] Today, 30% of the city's carbon emissions come from the power needed to keep these stations running.
[111] But more importantly, they require constant maintenance. As residents of the Palm Jumeirah discovered, as soon as one malfunctions, the consequences make themselves known pretty quickly.
[112] As the system struggled to cope, tankers were often called upon to fill the gap when it was caught short.
[113] In 2013, 30% of all the waste arriving at this plant in Jebel Ali was delivered by road. The poop snake was back.
[114] Cues were so bad that drivers were sometimes left waiting up to 24 hours to deposit their load,
[115] while others took matters into their own hands.
[116] After an initial nervous few minutes, they told us that dumping is routine.
[117] In those days, if you were lucky enough to stay in one of Dubai's seafront hotels, you might literally have had to stay there.
[118] The overflow caused by tankers dumping waste caused beaches to be closed as sewage clogged up on the shoreline.
# Growing Pains

[119] Now, granted, this is all pretty gross.
[120] But in case you think we're being unfair here, I want to reassure you that I'm not just trying to dunk on Dubai.
[121] This isn't a story of a city that was too busy lavishing money on vanity projects to get the basics of its infrastructure right.
[122] That period of growth from the mid-noughties up to today was faster and more dramatic than anyone could have predicted.
[123] And how can you plan and build a sophisticated infrastructure network when you don't know what the next 5 years is going to look like?
[124] >> >> Remember the Tideway Tunnel we mentioned earlier? That's designed as an overflow system to supplement London's venerable Victorian sewage network, which opened all the way back in 1865.
[125] In the 1850s, London was in a similar position to Dubai now. It was experiencing extraordinary population growth, and its waste disposal system, aka the River Thames, was struggling to keep up.
[126] In fact, it took a particularly hot and dry summer in 1858, known as the Great Stink, for the government to finally act.
[127] The city was engulfed such a foul stench that the curtains in Parliament were soaked with lime chloride to try and hide the smell.
[128] The sewer built over the next 6 years by Joseph Bazalgette was hailed as a marvel of civic engineering, but more importantly, it signaled a turning point in the city's evolution.
[129] It's not just the sewer Dubai is fixing up.
# The Future

[130] Back in 2021, the city's ruler, Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid Al Maktoum, unveiled Dubai 2040, a huge plan to fundamentally rewire the city and transform it from a builder's yard with Bugattis into a modern planned metropolis.
[131] Those isolated pockets hemmed in by motorways are going to give way to five new city centers, all with the amenities that residents need within short walking distances.
[132] Three existing areas are being redeveloped into mini city centers, and two new ones are being built from scratch.
[133] 680 million US dollars is being spent on 8 million square meters of green corridors for pedestrians and cyclists,
[134] and a new metro system is going to put half the city within 800 meters of a station, making public transport a viable way to get around.
[135] Dubai's strategic sewer tunnels may not be the most glamorous or even most excitingly named of construction mega projects, but they are incredibly important.
[136] This city is world-famous for what it's built above the ground, but as is so often it's what's happening under the ground on projects that are out of sight, out of mind,
[137] and led often by unsung heroes that makes what we see above ground happen.
[138] Today's video was sponsored by Brilliant. Don't forget that you guys can learn for free on Brilliant for a full 30 days by going to brilliant.org/theB1M, scanning the QR code on screen, or clicking the link in the description.
[139] Brilliant is also giving our viewers 20% off an annual premium subscription, which means you'll get unlimited daily access to everything on Brilliant.
[140] And as always guys, if you enjoyed this video and you want to get more from the definitive video channel for construction, push that flush button.
[141] I mean, hit that subscribe button.