# Introducing Chongqing East Station

[1] In the same way that your local chip shop can't be compared to the scale of McDonald's and the bus stop around the corner is in a slightly different league to LAX,
[2] no other train station lives up to the ludicrous size of Chongqing East.
[3] China's new high-speed rail hub is absolutely enormous.
[4] It's spread across 1.22 million square meters.
[5] That's six times bigger than Grand Central in New York, nearly 15 times larger than Europe's grandest train station, Leipzig Hauptbahnhof,
[6] and close to three times the size of Nagoya Station in Japan, once recognized as the world's largest train hub.
[7] Now, if train stations aren't your scale barometer of choice, then just know that Chongqing East covers a space vaster than 170 football pitches and more than two Vatican cities.
[8] And I know, as states go, the Vatican City isn't exactly huge, but we're talking about a train station here.
[9] Now, the significance of this transport hub reaches far beyond its staggering dimensions.
[10] You see, this might just be the most important step in China's infrastructure revolution so far.
# China's infrastructure mission

[11] So, we've shown you how big Chongqing East Station is, but it might be useful to give some context as to how massive China is itself.
[12] The nation has highways that stretch twice the length of the United States.
[13] It features more than a million bridges, thousands of kilometers of tunnels, and the largest high-speed rail network on the planet, stretching for more than 50,000 km.
[14] Comparatively, the country with the second most high-speed rail is Spain with a mere 3,000 km.
[15] And this is by meticulous design, all parts of an infrastructure mission that the People's Republic has embarked on for the last 30 years.
[16] Now, there are multiple reasons why China is throwing the kitchen sink at its infrastructure.
[17] Firstly, there's little doubt that there's a symbolic element at play.
[18] When any nation, not just China, searches for world records or starts making a big show of development, it's likely that they're trying to let the rest of the world know how well they're doing. All major nations do this.
[19] The most recent example of that with China is probably the massive Belt and Road Initiative.
[20] Since 2013, China's been investing billions to recreate the Silk Road trade routes of the past.
[21] The idea is to foster relationships and economic ties between countries along the route.
[22] Although some in the West have debated whether China is looking to exert influence as a nice side benefit.
[23] So, the Communist Party that holds of kind of meet the needs of the people and also being a leading figure on the world stage, I think they're very much intertwined.
[24] Our bullet price at deliver is the sort of performance legitimacy to say that, well, we are really able to deliver these enormous bridges
[25] or all sorts of infrastructure projects that the US and UK are not really able to do anymore
[26] and we are able to do these things to meet the needs of the people even though not not everybody needs a new bridge.
[27] But most people really do want all of these things and they feel very impressed with the state.
[28] The country's infrastructure boom is about a lot more than just putting on a show.
[29] There's wide-scale disparity between the east and west of this nation with the west of China historically being less developed and significantly poorer.
[30] In response, China's launched its very own war on poverty.
[31] The aim was to better connect the country, to mobilize its people, and therefore improve trade.
[32] As an example, the previously poor mountainous region of Guizhou is now home to half of the world's tallest bridges, including the record-breaking Qijiang Canyon Bridge.
[33] By 2021, China claimed it had eradicated extreme poverty by plunging a quarter of a trillion dollars into efforts.
[34] At the time, the nation defined extreme poverty as a person earning less than $2.30 per day, which is around $620 per year.
[35] But China's infrastructure mission is far from over.
[36] China's the country I call the engineering state because at various points in the recent past, the entirety of the senior leadership was made up of engineers.
[37] This is one of the inheritances that modern China has received from the Soviet Union.
[38] They sort of treat everything as a civil engineering exercise.
[39] So, part of why China has built so many roads, bridges, dams, nuclear, coal, wind, solar, as well as especially homes, is that the engineers are really want to just build a lot of stuff.
[40] In short, this is what present-day China does.
[41] And there's a few reasons why Chongqing is finding itself home to the country's latest mega projects.
# Why Chongqing?

[42] It's one of four direct-administered municipalities in the country and its southwestern near-central position has placed it in the midst of a development surge.
[43] Chongqing's GDP has been growing faster than the likes of Beijing with its core urban population now standing at around 10 million people.
[44] Amazingly, that's a quadrupling of the population in the last 30 years, which when you consider that China's population overall is actually declining, is pretty telling.
[45] Oh, and did I mention this place is absolutely crazy.
[46] I have just arrived to the craziest city on Earth and you probably have never even heard about it.
[47] >> trains floating on the river.
[48] Chongqing goes by a few nicknames: the River City, the Mountain City, or the more intriguing Cyberpunk City.
[49] Residents and visitors here joke that the area is built in 8D.
[50] Developed on the side of a mountain, this municipality's topography is nuts.
[51] And usually, if your carriage is heading towards a block of apartments, you'd think something horrible was happening, but not here.
[52] Liziba Station cuts right through the center of a housing block, perfect for your work commute, but maybe not so perfect for quiet nights in.
[53] As you continue your Chongqing tour, you'll find Raffles City down by the river, like China's answer to Marina Bay Sands.
[54] Over here is the deepest train station in the world, dropping to a depth of 116 m.
[55] And this is the perfect example of what I was talking about earlier.
[56] It's the Qixing Building and as you'll see, its rooftop plaza connects directly to street level.
[57] In short, this city really is something else.
[58] Now, because of its idealistic location, Chongqing has been earmarked as the center of China's high-speed rail.
[59] And with well over 3 billion trips taken on the nation's high-speed rail network in 2024, this new station had to be huge.
[60] We're going to come on to the engineering and why it's physically so big in just a moment.
[61] But first, it's important to understand what it really takes to get a project this massive to the point where you're ready to put spades in the ground.
[62] Modern mega builds demand years of planning, input, and coordination, often from experts that are spread right around the world in different time zones and working cultures.
[63] Even once you get through pre-construction and then get a building this big built, the job isn't over.
[64] Chongqing is more than just a rail station.
[65] It's intended as a central hub for an entire region.
[66] There's going to be retail units, restaurants, airlines, all kinds of different client relationships to manage, and expectations to fulfill.
[67] Managing relationships can be an ongoing struggle for many businesses, but it doesn't have to be.
[68] The right CRM can be an active collaborator, taking on tedious work so your team can focus on what actually moves the business forward.
[69] That's what Attio, the AI CRM, can do for you.
[70] No more spending weeks setting up a platform that takes months to understand.
[71] Attio instantly syncs with your email and calendar, so every interaction is automatically captured from day dots.
[72] Unlike other platforms that kind of bolt on AI as a bit of an afterthought, Attio is built from the ground up with AI at its core,
[73] meaning that intelligence is really woven into how your data is structured, surfaced, >> >> and acted upon.
[74] Think about the last time things were moving faster than you could track, multiple deals in motion, and the context split between your inbox, your phone calls, and your head.
[75] Where do you start?
[76] Well, most people normally freeze, but Attio changes that.
[77] Built on universal context, a unified intelligence layer native to Attio, every moving part of your business is represented in a format that's immediately accessible, accurately indexed, and ready to work with.
[78] Within seconds, you can ask Attio to pull your entire outreach history for a specific client, surface things that might have otherwise gone unnoticed, and get a clear picture of what needs to happen next.
[79] The manual work of logging notes, updating records, and keeping the team aligned all happens behind the scenes.
[80] You can even plug any MCP client into Attio, so your agents always have the context they need to act.
[81] Whether you're running product-led growth or enterprise sales, Attio adapts exactly to how your business works.
[82] If you want a CRM that's built on years of deep technical work, then Attio is it.
[83] Every architectural decision within it, from how your data is structured to how it's surfaced across different tools, has been designed in a way so that when you're ready to move fast, nothing can block you.
[84] Attio is completely free to try out, so there's nothing to lose.
[85] You can click the link or scan the QR code on screen to try out for yourself.
[86] Most of the time, we never see behind the curtain on a project like Chongqing East.
[87] We don't see the amazing people who are working largely off site to make sure a project goes to plan.
[88] But it's software like Asite that's built to represent and enable every moving part of a business that helps really give those teams the edge.
# Chongqing East Station is huge

[89] Chongqing East is positioned 20 km away from the city's downtown districts and features 15 platforms serviced by 29 lines. Now, I know what you're thinking.
[90] For a station that dwarfs Vatican City, 15 platforms sounds pretty conservative.
[91] After all, Grand Central in New York, although just a sixth of the size, has 44 platforms and a mighty 67 tracks.
[92] But Chongqing East comes with a contrasting design philosophy to that of Grand Central.
[93] New York's key train hub is really a commuter checkpoint, facilitating the get-up-and-go spirit of the city.
[94] There's no high-speed rail, and so the trains are generally a fair bit shorter, around the 200 m mark, maybe stretching towards 300 m at the top end.
[95] Chongqing East has a very different mission statement.
[96] It's seven high-speed lines allow the station to connect not just different neighborhoods, but entire different cities.
[97] The trains grow to well over 400 m, requiring much longer platforms and slower passenger turnaround times.
[98] >> >> Which isn't to say commuters aren't welcome.
[99] The rapid 350 km/h trains might steal the show, but over its eight floors, Chongqing East still operates conventional rail services, metro lines, buses, taxis, and even private parking.
[100] And it's all complete with shopping and a whole host of food amenities.
[101] You see, Chongqing East is the pilot for China's station-city integration method, transforming high-speed rail stations into huge multimodal hubs.
[102] The idea is to synchronize transport stops and in time fit them with hotels and full-on shopping centers.
[103] As an example of that strategy coming to life, if you're heading to Chongqing Jiangbei International, the city's key airports, you can check in for your flight at the train station on the way.
[104] You can even check your luggage in, depending on where you're traveling on to.
[105] Constructed literally on the side of a mountain, the design is inspired by the terrain, the river, and the nearby trees.
# Building a giant

[106] So, before any structural work could begin, crews had to create a level foundation by cutting into the landscape to clear the soil.
[107] Deep piles followed, drilled into the ground to stabilize those foundations.
[108] The first five levels of the building were constructed at the start, followed by the three upper levels, all supported by reinforced concrete frames for the structural base.
[109] It's reported that a mind-blowing 2 million cubic meters of concrete and some 366,000 tons of steel were needed to make this station happen.
[110] To put that into perspective, it's more than double the amount of concrete used for Mossy Rock, one of the tallest dams in the US.
[111] We really are talking about crazy amounts of material here for a train station.
[112] But despite the fact this thing was built on the side of a mountain, the most challenging part of the process was probably the roof due to its size and scale.
[113] This thing is absolutely enormous, covering an area of 120,000 square meters and weighing in at 16,500 tons.
[114] It sits like a curved canopy, covering the structure down below with these large-span steel tube trusses.
[115] And it's supported by giant 41-m tall columns shaped like Huangjueping trees, the city tree of Chongqing.
[116] They're covered in 1,200 stainless steel scales about 3 mm thick.
[117] The idea is that the smaller the scale, the easier it is to manipulate around the curves of the columns.
[118] A massive glass curtain wall then floods the station with light to create a really nice natural aesthetic.
[119] Now, all of this is constructed in scorching temperatures that regularly climb to more than 40° C.
[120] Cooling pipes were used to help prevent the concrete from cracking.
[121] But for the workers, a more novel solution was needed.
[122] Calling all robots. Calling all robots.
[123] Yep, we're talking robots, and lots of them.
[124] Everything from laser-guided bots to level the site to glass installation droids, and there were even tile-laying robots.
[125] All of that was overseen by yet more robots described as sentinels.
[126] They were fitted with AI vision.
[127] If you weren't wearing your hard hats or vehicles were in the wrong place, the sentinels would step in.
[128] Apparently, China's robot army tripled average work efficiency, halved labor costs, and limited safety incidents by 90%.
[129] We might just be looking at the future of construction here.
[130] The scale of Chongqing East station and the speed with which it was completed is no surprise.
[131] The whole thing took just 38 months.
[132] China is so used to setting engineering records these days that they must be finding it a bit mundane.
# Can the records continue to fall?

[133] The highest bridge in the world? Sure.
[134] The biggest dam? Easy.
[135] The largest high-speed rail network on the planet?
[136] Done that.
[137] Building a 10-story building in less than 29 hours? Easy.
[138] The world's deepest station? Yeah, what of it?
[139] I could go on, but the real question is, why?
[140] The nation's infrastructure surge probably began in the 1980s.
[141] The aim was to catch up with the development of world-leading nations and become a technological superpower.
[142] At one time, the country's mission focus was giant skyscrapers envied across the world.
[143] But their tall tower climb is largely an end.
[144] There is kind of the sense from the top leader that these big cities don't need to get much larger,
[145] and a lot of these super tall skyscrapers may have brought prestige in the past, but the sense from Beijing is that, you know, they don't need to build these super tall buildings.
[146] And so I think the the focus for the country has been to build out other sectors, build out other economic zones, not give so much attention to these already big winners like Shanghai as well as Beijing.
[147] These days, the target is infrastructure.
[148] China has more dams and bridges than anywhere else on the planet, and they just keep coming.
[149] Given how these projects are covered by the Chinese media, the records seem pretty relevant.
[150] Having lived in a number of cities over a 6-year period, Dan tells us there's a lot of pride amongst the population in what is being achieved.
[151] Whether or not it's sustainable is another question.
[152] Take Guizhou, for instance.
[153] Many of the massive bridges hidden away in the mountains are remarkable to look at, but the economic return on them, given the material and carbon costs, doesn't always match up.
[154] And I guess the argument from China's leadership is that this isn't just about money.
[155] It's about the benefit to villages nearby, which is admirable.
[156] However, as Dan explains, a lot of the record setting is more about competition.
[157] A lot of party secretaries of provinces and municipalities are able to advance through the ranks of the Communist Party, mostly by achieving two targets.
[158] The first is generating economic growth.
[159] The second is keeping a lid on political dissent and making sure that too many protests or reasons to protest.
[160] The challenge with a lot of these party secretaries is that most people are not terribly creative in figuring out how to actually develop their own regions.
[161] And so they take a look over their shoulder at what the next guy was doing, which often meant, you know, building another big bridge, building a really tall skyscraper.
[162] Now, while China is unique in its ability to create infrastructure at mind-blowing speeds, basic economics would suggest that this can't go on forever.
[163] When you build a massive bridge or a huge train station, it's not just the material and construction costs that matter, but the maintenance, too.
[164] It all comes at a fee.
[165] It will prolong for a while, but the forces of drag will be more and more severe because it ought to stop at some point.
[166] China's demographic decline is not very significant now, but in 20 years or so, it will be pretty significant.
[167] China has, I think, not built super tall buildings for the very reasonable case that it is no longer economical.
[168] And so, between the forces of economy in the short term, demography in the longer term, the fact that a lot of local governments are already running out of money,
[169] one should expect for a lot of this construction boom to stop.
[170] But who's to say that's an issue?
[171] China has already achieved multitudes in its infrastructure revolution, and as with the tall building boom of the past, the nation might decide that this cycle of developments is nearing its natural end.
[172] Although, given what we know about the appetite for progression in the People's Republic and some of the mega projects that are currently in the works,
[173] don't go betting against China's ability to continue building bigger and bolder projects than we've ever seen before. This video was sponsored by Asite.
[174] Don't forget that you can learn more about Asite at the link below, and that it massively helps us out when you guys take the time to go and check out our video sponsors.
[175] And as always, guys, enjoy this video, and you want to get more from the definitive video channel for construction, make sure you're subscribed to The B1M.