[15] In pole position was the United States.
[16] With its technical prowess and
[17] superpower resources, work began on an
[18] all-American train that would leave the
[19] Shinkansen in the dust. Hitting

[45] >>
[46] >> We have airplanes which fly three times
[47] faster than sound. We have television
[48] cameras that are orbiting Mars, but we
[49] have the same tired and inadequate mass
[50] transportation between our towns and
[51] cities that we had 30 years ago.

[102] And there was definitely a movement
[103] forward to get into more mass
[104] transportation. What became known as the
[105] Northeast Corridor, then owned by the
[106] Pennsylvania Railroad,
[107] was a prime target for that. It was

[115] capital, Washington, D.C. As Johnson's
[116] high-speed dream began to take shape, it
[117] did so in the form of Senator Pell's
[118] plan for the Northeast Corridor.
[119] The bill sponsored two test projects.

[197] And so, they had to change the way the
[198] the wire was strung, and they uh
[199] also had to change the way the
[200] pantograph operated from a sort of a
[201] triangular shape to a V-shape, and
[202] to keep tension on it and keep
[203] it in contact with the wire. In 1966,

[424] problem today. California high-speed
[425] rail is learning the lessons from
[426] Metroliner by carving out its own route
[427] along the West Coast,
[428] but as a result of that, it's become
[429] tangled up in the thorny issue of land
[430] acquisition. It's hardly encouraging,
[431] but the High-Speed Act does have a
[432] legacy it can be proud of and one that
[433] Senator Pell saw coming all along.
