[1] In 1964, the eyes of the world were fixed on Japan as the Olympic Games kicked off in Tokyo.
[9] But, while the bullet train became a national icon in Japan, 60 years on, the US is still struggling to build its first high-speed rail line.
[18] We have television cameras that are orbiting Mars, but we have the same tired and inadequate mass transportation between our towns and cities that we had 30 years ago.
[20] And to make it worse, Japan, a country the US was at war with just 20 years earlier, was now leading the world with its latest locomotive.
[35] It called for a revitalized rail network serving the highly dense cluster of cities along the Northeast Corridor, a network we now call the Northeast Corridor.
[41] It was already electrified, had been since 1930s, and it was ripe for further development into a more high-speed transportation corridor between the economic capital of the US, New York, and the political capital, Washington, D.C.
[53] Forget building a new railway, running the B1M comes with a ton of back office work, chasing invoices, signing contracts, scheduling resources, HR, you name it.
[54] But, now I can do all of that within Odoo because they've taken 45 apps and brought them all into one efficient ecosystem.
[81] Because of the project's short time frames, the PRR wanted to buy trains that would run at 120 mph.
[82] They'd be fairly straightforward to build and wouldn't need all the expensive track upgrades that were proposed.
[97] A new computerized speed control system was fitted, which allowed the driver to set the train's speed by a dial and then leave any braking or accelerating to be done by the train's on-board computer.
[105] It would also clash with how the trains were to be used. The Japanese Zero series was designed to be deployed in standardized 12-car sets, but the Metroliner was designed for flexibility.
[121] but even then most issues weren't resolved. Between 1969 and 1970, nearly half the Metroliner cars were out of service because of technical faults.
[134] Instead of upgrading, an entirely new purpose-built route was constructed, a new main line or Shinkansen in Japanese.