[1] So, take a look at this. It's one of
[2] Europe's most important highways running
[3] all the way across Switzerland.
[4] It connects the German and Italian
[5] borders creating a clear route through
[6] the Alps. It's a journey that's only
[7] been possible since the late
[8] 20th century and it's all thanks to this
[9] tunnel which millions of people rely on
[10] every year.
[11] But now it's starting to show its age
[12] and has to close for repairs.
[13] Without some sort of replacement, the
[14] consequences could be severe and cause
[15] chaos right across this region.
[16] Which is why the Swiss government is
[17] building a second tunnel to ensure this
[18] critical corridor remains open using
[19] cutting-edge techniques. It's a project
[20] that simply cannot fail and yet it's now
[21] having to overcome a pretty big problem
[22] that's left this huge piece of equipment
[23] in a sticky situation.
[24] Imagine you're about to take a drive
[25] across continental Europe from north to
[26] south. Let's say Amsterdam is your
[27] starting point and you're heading down
[28] to Rome. The chances are your satnav is
[29] going to take you through Switzerland
[30] which sits right in the heart of the
[31] mainland. But more than that, you're
[32] probably going to be directed down this
[33] road in particular, the A2. It's a
[34] hugely important transport corridor for
[35] the entire continent and it passes right
[36] through the middle of the Alps. If it
[37] were to close, thousands of drivers
[38] would have to find a detour in a place
[39] where they are very hard to come by.
[40] They'd either be forced onto other
[41] already busy highways or one of these
[42] narrow passes, some of which are
[43] unusable in the winter.
[44] Fortunately, that's unlikely to happen
[45] because the A2 is part of one of the
[46] most impressive tunnel networks in the
[47] world and not just for cars. You've got
[48] the 57 km Gotthard Base Tunnel which is
[49] currently the longest rail tunnel in the
[50] world, at least until the one between
[51] Lyon and Turin finishes. Then there's
[52] the Gotthard Tunnel. No, that's not just
[53] the same thing again, it's a much older
[54] one. And the Gotthard Road Tunnel which
[55] carries the A2. Why do they all sound so
[56] similar? Well, it's because all of them
[57] pay homage to Saint Gotthard who you
[58] know is an 11th century German bishop.
[59] Basically, for this video you've not got
[60] to get too hung up on all those
[61] different route names. The main thing to
[62] remember is that here we're talking
[63] about the road tunnel.
[64] It takes the A2 underground for almost
[65] 17 km between Airolo and Göschenen and
[66] it's been doing so since the '80s.
[67] Before its opening, drivers had to take
[68] the Gotthard Pass, a winding route that
[69] was first used properly in the 1400s.
[70] A journey that typically took 1 and 1/2
[71] hours via the pass was cut to just 15
[72] minutes. Construction took 7 years and
[73] was primarily done with conventional
[74] drill and blast. Now, if you're a B1M
[75] fan, then you're going to know this
[76] already, but just in case, it's where
[77] holes are drilled into rock, filled with
[78] explosives, there's a huge bang,
[79] and the rubble is cleared away. Then you
[80] do that process again and again.
[81] Completing in 1980, it became the
[82] world's longest road tunnel, a title it
[83] held for 20 years. Today, it's the
[84] seventh longest. However, by the 2010s,
[85] this critical connection was in need of
[86] an overhaul. The structure was beginning
[87] to show its age. So, in 2012, the Swiss
[88] Federal Council decided it was time to,
[89] yep, you guessed it, build yet another
[90] new tunnel. Not because it would boost
[91] capacity or replace the existing one
[92] entirely. Instead, this additional
[93] crossing will take over from the current
[94] tunnel allowing it to be upgraded. Both
[95] tunnels will then operate side by side
[96] once the original tube has been brought
[97] up to spec.
[98] Basically, it's for the security
[99] standard and also all the
[100] electromechanical part have to be
[101] renovate. We cannot close the tunnel for
[102] 3 4 years. That's why the Swiss
[103] Confederation decide to build a new
[104] tunnel, a second tunnel, just to
[105] renovate the the first one without
[106] interrupt the the traffic.
[107] Four years after it was put forwards,
[108] the people of Switzerland gave their
[109] consent to the plan in a referendum.
[110] Then once another 4 years had passed,
[111] preparation work began and the project
[112] was given a 2030 completion date.
[113] Now, before we go any further, if you
[114] were struggling with all those different
[115] tunnel names earlier on, then you won't
[116] believe what they're calling this one,
[117] the second Gotthard Road Tunnel, which
[118] at least makes sense.
[119] Unsurprisingly, there are many
[120] similarities between the old and new
[121] tunnels. They're exactly the same length
[122] because they have to run in parallel
[123] with the existing service tunnel or
[124] safety gallery that's placed in between
[125] them. And construction is taking place
[126] from both ends simultaneously, just like
[127] in the 1970s. But the methods have moved
[128] on quite a bit since then. So, this time
[129] most of the work is being done with
[130] tunnel boring machines.
[131] Now, before we go any further with
[132] today's video, we need to stop
[133] everything because I have got some very
[134] big news that I am finally allowed to
[135] share. Last year, Penguin Random House
[136] asked me if I'd like to write a book. I
[137] said yes, I've written a book,
[138] and here it is. It is called Megabuilds,
[139] 10 colossal construction projects that
[140] will change our world. Over the last 10
[141] years, I have had a front row seat on
[142] some of this planet's most incredible
[143] construction projects and they are all
[144] in here. I've written about them, I've
[145] gone deeper than I've ever gone before
[146] in any video, story or any kind of like
[147] long-form documentary. This is behind
[148] the scenes, it's up close and personal,
[149] it meets the teams, it's the human
[150] stories, it's the engineering in detail,
[151] it's my personal experiences and some of
[152] the calamities I've had along the way
[153] getting up close with these projects. I
[154] have really enjoyed writing this. Some
[155] of my mates have been like, "Oh, nice.
[156] Who Who ghost wrote that for you?" No
[157] one. I can't afford a fancy ghostwriter,
[158] me. I wrote this. Every single word of
[159] this has come from my head into my
[160] laptop and then into this book, all for
[161] your reading pleasure. Guys, I never
[162] thought I could write a book, but I have
[163] and obviously I'm biased, but I actually
[164] kind of think it's quite good. It is
[165] available to pre-order now, the link is
[166] below. Pre-ordering is incredibly
[167] important. Basically, my entire future
[168] happiness depends on you pre-ordering
[169] this book. So guys, if you love the B1M,
[170] if you love these stories, if you love
[171] learning more about construction in a
[172] down-to-earth way that's easy to
[173] understand and can be read by anyone, go
[174] and pre-order my book, Megabuilds,
[175] today.
[176] This TBM, Alessandra, is digging from
[177] the north and this one, Paulina, has
[178] been coming up from the south. Both have
[179] a diameter of more than 12 m. After
[180] around 2 years of tunneling, they're due
[181] to meet in the middle having passed
[182] through completely different types of
[183] ground on the way as well as major fault
[184] zones, also known as shear zones. These
[185] are areas of fractured weak rock with
[186] squeezing characteristics. Both TBMs are
[187] going to encounter them after they've
[188] bored for several kilometers, except
[189] they won't be drilling through them. For
[190] these sections, construction teams have
[191] switched to the old conventional method,
[192] albeit temporarily.
[193] Marti Group, one of the contractors
[194] responsible for construction on the
[195] south side, has been doing this to get
[196] through a particularly difficult
[197] spot. This zone is called the Gütsch
[198] shear zone. It's a a known shear zone,
[199] very large, 400 m of faulted rock at 5
[200] km in the tunnel. Everybody knew that
[201] with a tunnel boring machine at this
[202] diameter, it would not be possible to go
[203] through this squeezing rock ground
[204] because it would would get jammed very
[205] often probably.
[206] Despite being slower, drill and blast is
[207] considered safer in areas of higher
[208] pressure like this. Doing it this way
[209] means they can be more precise,
[210] immediately stabilizing the rock with
[211] anchor bolts and shotcrete. That's
[212] basically where you spray on concrete
[213] using a big hose. It kind of acts as
[214] like an initial lining for the tunnel
[215] before it's then waterproofed and
[216] covered with yet more concrete.
[217] When using a TBM, the tunnel is lined
[218] with precast segments that are installed
[219] using the same machine. Those sections
[220] through the main fault zones were
[221] actually among the first to be
[222] excavated. A pair of access tunnels were
[223] built prior to the main one using a
[224] smaller set of TBMs. That allowed
[225] construction crews to get inside early
[226] and tackle the more difficult parts
[227] before the bigger machines arrived
[228] later. From there, we could start with a
[229] full face excavation through this
[230] squeezing ground so that it was always
[231] possible to to secure entire section of
[232] the tunnel and to maintain the right
[233] security measures.
[234] Before any of the main tunneling could
[235] happen though, years were spent
[236] preparing the north and south portals so
[237] they were ready for the TBMs. And that
[238] meant more drilling and blasting. The
[239] areas that support the construction work
[240] also had to be built. Up in Göschenen, a
[241] set of caverns were carved out and
[242] that's where the concrete's being made
[243] for the tunnel lining. It's being done
[244] below ground because out in the open
[245] air, there isn't much space to work
[246] with.
[247] We need all also the logistic for
[248] material management for concrete
[249] production. We have very very small
[250] surface and that's why part of the
[251] installation will be done underground.
[252] For example, the concrete production on
[253] the north side, it's all underground.
[254] There's also another more dramatic
[255] reason why these facilities are set into
[256] the mountain. It's because this whole
[257] area is prone to avalanches.
[258] Close to these caverns is a large spot
[259] where the excavated material is
[260] temporarily stored before almost all of
[261] it is reused. More on that in a bit.
[262] Meanwhile, in Airolo, because there's
[263] less of an avalanche threat here and
[264] more space to work with, the concrete
[265] and segment manufacturing is happening
[266] outside. By February 2025, everything
[267] was set for the TBMs to start digging,
[268] and so off they went. And for the first
[269] few months, all was well. Until June,
[270] when Paulina found herself in quite a
[271] bit of trouble.
[272] She traveled less than 200 m, but was
[273] already experiencing serious geological
[274] challenges much sooner than expected.
[275] The machine was forced to stop, which is
[276] an absolute last resort on projects like
[277] this.
[278] And in stopping, it then became stuck.
[279] [snorts]
[280] Paulina had hit an area of highly
[281] fractured loose rock and cavities,
[282] exactly the kind of ground that TBMs
[283] absolutely hate.
[284] That caused the face of the tunnel, the
[285] part that's at the front being
[286] excavated, to collapse. The situation is
[287] that the cutter head is blocked. The
[288] torque of the machine is not enough to
[289] turn it. We have to liberate it from the
[290] front so that it can can turn again and
[291] bore its way through this difficult
[292] zone. They're doing this by digging an
[293] extra access tunnel shooting off from
[294] the one that's already been built into
[295] the fault zone. It'll enable them to get
[296] in front of the TBM and dig back towards
[297] it so it can be freed sometime in the
[298] spring of 2026.
[299] Even so, it's an expensive setback. Want
[300] to guess how much? Well, around 20
[301] million Swiss francs or 20 million US
[302] dollars has been added to the overall
[303] cost, which stands at just over 2
[304] billion francs. That's about 2.7 billion
[305] US dollars. It's resulted in months of
[306] extra work as well, although they're
[307] still aiming for the same completion
[308] date. Tasks that were due to be
[309] completed later on have been brought
[310] forward, and this 500-m problem zone is
[311] now going to be done with drill and
[312] blast instead. Teams are going to work
[313] three shifts 7 days a week to get things
[314] back on track.
[315] So, as long as there are no further
[316] slip-ups, these giant machines should be
[317] able to make their rendezvous in 2027 as
[318] planned.
[319] I guess the question is, how much did
[320] they know about this tricky area
[321] beforehand? And if they knew a bit about
[322] it, why didn't they just go with the
[323] conventional method right from the
[324] beginning? Well, according to a press
[325] release from the Swiss Federal Roads
[326] Office, the challenging geology on the
[327] southern side was predicted, and there
[328] were risks involved with the method
[329] chosen.
[330] In other words, they knew it was there,
[331] but it turned out to be more hazardous
[332] and positioned slightly differently to
[333] what they thought. There was no shortage
[334] of geological data, either, as most of
[335] it was taken from the original analysis
[336] for the first tunnel. Clearly, the team
[337] is now having to deal with the
[338] consequences of this gamble, but you've
[339] got to realize that this is not a simple
[340] thing to get right.
[341] It's very very difficult to make a a
[342] right evaluation of this
[343] geology. The bigger fault zone, it was
[344] easy to situate, but there are some
[345] smaller fault zone there are a big
[346] problem because it's not easy to
[347] understand where are these fault zone.
[348] What the impact to the TBM this fault
[349] zone could have. Even the original
[350] tunnel had its share of complications,
[351] and we've seen similar instance in the
[352] past in other parts of the world like
[353] India and Australia with even more
[354] serious outcomes. It was known from the
[355] building of the first tube and the
[356] safety gallery with conventional methods
[357] to have have
[358] a lot of problems going through there.
[359] They had to rebuild part of it because
[360] of a squeezing ground conditions.
[361] Geology is always challenging in
[362] tunneling. You think you know everything
[363] about it, there is still surprises.
[364] Now, we should clarify that obviously
[365] the TBMs won't actually physically touch
[366] each other when they both eventually get
[367] to the middle. It could be quite messy
[368] if they did. In fact, they're going to
[369] stop just before that point when it'll
[370] be time to dismantle and remove them. We
[371] should also explain something about the
[372] size of those TBMs. You might be
[373] wondering why they need to be so large
[374] when the biggest of things that's going
[375] to travel through here is trucks, and
[376] they're only about 4 m high at most.
[377] Well, the tunnel linings add around half
[378] a meter of thickness, but it's more to
[379] do with what's going above and below the
[380] road. On top, there's going to be space
[381] for ventilation, and underneath there'll
[382] be a set of service ducts. One's going
[383] to carry all the utilities for
[384] maintaining the tunnel, which is hardly
[385] a surprise. But the other is going to
[386] have high-voltage power lines running
[387] through it. That hasn't been done
[388] anywhere else in Europe, and it's going
[389] to replace the line that's now spread
[390] over the Gotthard Pass on big pylons,
[391] which isn't much to look at. Another
[392] clever idea is what they're doing with
[393] the excavated material, which amounts to
[394] almost 7 and 1/2 million tons overall.
[395] Around a quarter of the stuff is going
[396] back into the concrete mix for the same
[397] projects, as well as the restoration of
[398] the old tunnel. A further quarter is
[399] going to be used for road surfaces. The
[400] remaining half is going to be sent back
[401] to Lake Lucerne, about 50 km north of
[402] Göschenen. There, it's going to be used
[403] to make shallow water zones, creating
[404] new habitats for plants and animals. It
[405] sounds great, but let's get back to the
[406] earlier point for a second. We said
[407] before that adding this second tunnel
[408] won't boost capacity, which might sound
[409] a bit strange. Although traffic is going
[410] to be split across two tubes instead of
[411] one, it doesn't mean there's going to be
[412] twice as much traffic coming through
[413] here.
[414] Instead, there's going to be one tunnel
[415] for each direction, which is better than
[416] things are now, where cars pass each
[417] other head-on in the same quite small
[418] space. But in the new tunnels, the cars
[419] are still going to be traveling single
[420] file with the other lane reserved as a
[421] hard shoulder or an emergency lane. The
[422] idea of that is to make the tunnels
[423] overall more safer and more reliable,
[424] which you can't really argue with.
[425] And that's because they're not actually
[426] allowed to make this road any busier.
[427] Article 84 of the Swiss Federal
[428] Constitution states that the capacity of
[429] transport routes in the Alpine region
[430] may not be increased. It means the
[431] congestion often seen around the
[432] existing tunnel probably won't go away
[433] once the new one opens. In 2025, queues
[434] stretching for several kilometers were
[435] reported multiple times. So, some might
[436] feel this new tunnel won't actually make
[437] much of a difference if it doesn't fix
[438] the traffic. But others would argue it's
[439] about more than that, namely ensuring
[440] this vital artery of Europe's transport
[441] system doesn't come to a complete
[442] standstill, even if this giant machine
[443] that's so crucial to its completion is
[444] doing just that for the time being.
[445] The Swiss population has choose for this
[446] second tunnel, and we have the
[447] responsibility to do it. I think it's
[448] the biggest project now in Switzerland.
[449] Also, the people they they work there,
[450] the construction company, they are all
[451] proud to to work for for this project,
[452] and we are also proud to to work for
[453] this project.
[454] As always, if you enjoyed this video and
[455] you want to get more from the definitive
[456] video channel for construction,
[457] make sure you subscribe to the B1M.