# Intro

[1] So, take a look at this.
[2] It's one of Europe's most important highways running all the way across Switzerland.
[3] It connects the German and Italian borders creating a clear route through the Alps.
[4] It's a journey that's only been possible since the late 20th century
[5] and it's all thanks to this tunnel which millions of people rely on every year.
[6] But now it's starting to show its age and has to close for repairs.
[7] Without some sort of replacement, the consequences could be severe and cause chaos right across this region.
[8] Which is why the Swiss government is building a second tunnel to ensure this critical corridor remains open using cutting-edge techniques.
[9] It's a project that simply cannot fail and yet it's now having to overcome a pretty big problem that's left this huge piece of equipment in a sticky situation.
# Swiss Infrastructure

[10] Imagine you're about to take a drive across continental Europe from north to south.
[11] Let's say Amsterdam is your starting point and you're heading down to Rome.
[12] The chances are your satnav is going to take you through Switzerland which sits right in the heart of the mainland. But more than that, you're probably going to be directed down this road in particular, the A2.
[13] It's a hugely important transport corridor for the entire continent and it passes right through the middle of the Alps.
[14] If it were to close, thousands of drivers would have to find a detour in a place where they are very hard to come by.
[15] They'd either be forced onto other already busy highways or one of these narrow passes, some of which are unusable in the winter.
[16] Fortunately, that's unlikely to happen because the A2 is part of one of the most impressive tunnel networks in the world and not just for cars.
[17] You've got the 57 km Gotthard Base Tunnel which is currently the longest rail tunnel in the world, at least until the one between Lyon and Turin finishes.
[18] Then there's the Gotthard Tunnel.
[19] No, that's not just the same thing again, it's a much older one.
[20] And the Gotthard Road Tunnel which carries the A2.
[21] Why do they all sound so similar?
[22] Well, it's because all of them pay homage to Saint Gotthard who you know is an 11th century German bishop.
# Gotthard Road Tunnel

[23] Basically, for this video you've not got to get too hung up on all those different route names. The main thing to remember is that here we're talking about the road tunnel.
[24] It takes the A2 underground for almost 17 km between Airolo and Göschenen and it's been doing so since the '80s.
[25] Before its opening, drivers had to take the Gotthard Pass, a winding route that was first used properly in the 1400s.
[26] A journey that typically took 1 and 1/2 hours via the pass was cut to just 15 minutes.
[27] Construction took 7 years and was primarily done with conventional drill and blast.
[28] Now, if you're a B1M fan, then you're going to know this already, but just in case, it's where holes are drilled into rock, filled with explosives, there's a huge bang, and the rubble is cleared away.
[29] Then you do that process again and again.
[30] Completing in 1980, it became the world's longest road tunnel, a title it held for 20 years.
[31] Today, it's the seventh longest. However, by the 2010s, this critical connection was in need of an overhaul.
[32] The structure was beginning to show its age.
[33] So, in 2012, the Swiss Federal Council decided it was time to, yep, you guessed it, build yet another new tunnel.
# Time for Another

[34] Not because it would boost capacity or replace the existing one entirely.
[35] Instead, this additional crossing will take over from the current tunnel allowing it to be upgraded. Both tunnels will then operate side by side once the original tube has been brought up to spec.
[36] Basically, it's for the security standard and also all the electromechanical part have to be renovate. We cannot close the tunnel
[37] for 3 4 years.
[38] That's why the Swiss Confederation decide to build a new tunnel, a second tunnel, just to renovate the the first one without interrupt the the traffic.
[39] Four years after it was put forwards, the people of Switzerland gave their consent to the plan in a referendum.
[40] Then once another 4 years had passed, preparation work began and the project was given a 2030 completion date.
[41] Now, before we go any further, if you were struggling with all those different tunnel names earlier on, then you won't believe what they're calling this one, the second Gotthard Road Tunnel, which at least makes sense.
# Tunnelling Methods

[42] Unsurprisingly, there are many similarities between the old and new tunnels. They're exactly the same length
[43] because they have to run in parallel with the existing service tunnel or safety gallery that's placed in between them.
[44] And construction is taking place from both ends simultaneously, just like in the 1970s.
[45] But the methods have moved on quite a bit since then. So, this time most of the work is being done with tunnel boring machines.
[46] Now, before we go any further with today's video, we need to stop everything because I have got some very big news that I am finally allowed to share.
[47] Last year, Penguin Random House asked me if I'd like to write a book.
[48] I said yes, I've written a book,
[49] and here it is.
[50] It is called Megabuilds, 10 colossal construction projects that will change our world.
[51] Over the last 10 years, I have had a front row seat on some of this planet's most incredible construction projects
[52] and they are all in here.
[53] I've written about them, I've gone deeper than I've ever gone before
[54] in any video, story or any kind of like long-form documentary.
[55] This is behind the scenes,
[56] it's up close and personal, it meets the teams, it's the human stories, it's the engineering in detail, it's my personal experiences and some of the calamities I've had along the way
[57] getting up close with these projects.
[58] I have really enjoyed writing this. Some of my mates
[59] have been like, "Oh, nice. Who Who ghost wrote that for you?"
[60] No one. I can't afford a fancy ghostwriter,
[61] me. I wrote this.
[62] Every single word of this has come from my head into my laptop and then into this book,
[63] all for your reading pleasure.
[64] Guys, I never thought I could write a book,
[65] but I have and obviously I'm biased,
[66] but I actually kind of think it's quite good. It is available to pre-order now,
[67] the link is below.
[68] Pre-ordering is incredibly important. Basically, my entire future happiness depends on you pre-ordering
[69] this book.
[70] So guys, if you love the B1M, if you love these stories, if you love learning more about construction in a down-to-earth way that's easy to understand and can be read by anyone, go and pre-order my book, Megabuilds, today.
[71] This TBM, Alessandra, is digging from the north and this one, Paulina, has been coming up from the south.
# Complex Geology

[72] Both have a diameter of more than 12 m.
[73] After around 2 years of tunneling, they're due to meet in the middle having passed through completely different types of ground on the way
[74] as well as major fault zones, also known as shear zones.
[75] These are areas of fractured weak rock with squeezing characteristics.
[76] Both TBMs are going to encounter them after they've bored for several kilometers, except they won't be drilling through them. For these sections, construction teams have switched to the old conventional method, albeit temporarily.
[77] Marti Group, one of the contractors responsible for construction on the south side, has been doing this to get through a particularly difficult spot.
[78] This zone is called the Gütsch shear zone. It's a a known shear zone, very large, 400 m of faulted rock at 5 km in the tunnel.
[79] Everybody knew that with a tunnel boring machine at this diameter, it would not be possible to go through this squeezing rock ground because it would would get jammed very often probably.
[80] Despite being slower, drill and blast is considered safer in areas of higher pressure like this.
[81] Doing it this way means they can be more precise, immediately stabilizing the rock with anchor bolts and shotcrete.
[82] That's basically where you spray on concrete using a big hose.
[83] It kind of acts as like an initial lining for the tunnel before it's then waterproofed
[84] and covered with yet more concrete.
# Getting Prepared

[85] When using a TBM, the tunnel is lined with precast segments that are installed using the same machine.
[86] Those sections through the main fault zones were actually among the first to be excavated.
[87] A pair of access tunnels were built prior to the main one using a smaller set of TBMs.
[88] That allowed construction crews to get inside early and tackle the more difficult parts before the bigger machines arrived
[89] later. From there, we could start with a full face excavation through this squeezing ground so that it was always possible to to secure entire section of the tunnel and to maintain the right security measures.
[90] Before any of the main tunneling could happen though, years were spent preparing the north and south portals so they were ready for the TBMs.
[91] And that meant more drilling and blasting.
[92] The areas that support the construction work also had to be built.
[93] Up in Göschenen, a set of caverns were carved out
[94] and that's where the concrete's being made for the tunnel lining.
[95] It's being done below ground because out in the open air, there isn't much space to work with.
[96] We need all also the logistic for material management for concrete production. We have very very small surface and that's why part of the installation will be done underground.
[97] For example, the concrete production on the north side, it's all underground.
[98] There's also another more dramatic reason why these facilities are set into the mountain. It's because this whole area is prone to avalanches.
[99] Close to these caverns is a large spot where the excavated material is temporarily stored before almost all of it is reused. More on that in a bit.
[100] Meanwhile, in Airolo, because there's less of an avalanche threat here and more space to work with, the concrete and segment manufacturing is happening outside.
# A False Start

[101] By February 2025, everything was set for the TBMs to start digging, and so off they went. And for the first few months, all was well.
[102] Until June, when Paulina found herself in quite a bit of trouble.
[103] She traveled less than 200 m, but was already experiencing serious geological challenges much sooner than expected.
[104] The machine was forced to stop, which is an absolute last resort on projects like this.
[105] And in stopping, it then became stuck.
[106] [snorts] Paulina had hit an area of highly fractured loose rock and cavities, exactly the kind of ground that TBMs absolutely hate.
[107] That caused the face of the tunnel, the part that's at the front being excavated, to collapse.
[108] The situation is that the cutter head is blocked.
[109] The torque of the machine is not enough to turn it.
[110] We have to liberate it from the front so that it can can turn again and bore its way through this difficult zone.
[111] They're doing this by digging an extra access tunnel shooting off from the one that's already been built into the fault zone.
[112] It'll enable them to get in front of the TBM and dig back towards it so it can be freed
[113] sometime in the spring of 2026.
[114] Even so, it's an expensive setback. Want to guess how much? Well,
[115] around 20 million Swiss francs or 20 million US dollars
[116] has been added to the overall cost, which stands at just over 2 billion francs. That's about 2.7 billion US dollars.
[117] It's resulted in months of extra work as well, although they're still aiming for the same completion date.
[118] Tasks that were due to be completed later on have been brought forward, and this 500-m problem zone is now going to be done with drill and blast instead. Teams are going to work three shifts 7 days a week
[119] to get things back on track.
[120] So, as long as there are no further slip-ups, these giant machines should be able to make their rendezvous in 2027 as planned.
# Weighing the Risks

[121] I guess the question is, how much did they know about this tricky area beforehand?
[122] And if they knew a bit about it,
[123] why didn't they just go with the conventional method right from the beginning?
[124] Well, according to a press release from the Swiss Federal Roads Office, the challenging geology on the southern side was predicted, and there were risks involved with the method chosen.
[125] In other words, they knew it was there, but it turned out to be more hazardous and positioned slightly differently to what they thought.
[126] There was no shortage of geological data, either, as most of it was taken from the original analysis for the first tunnel.
[127] Clearly, the team is now having to deal with the consequences of this gamble, but you've got to realize that this is not a simple thing to get right.
[128] It's very very difficult to make a a right evaluation of this geology. The bigger fault zone,
[129] it was easy to situate, but there are some smaller fault zone there are a big problem because it's not easy to understand where are these fault zone.
[130] What the impact to the TBM this fault zone could have.
[131] Even the original tunnel had its share of complications,
[132] and we've seen similar instance in the past in other parts of the world like India and Australia with even more serious outcomes.
[133] It was known from the building of the first tube and the safety gallery with conventional methods to have have a lot of problems going through there.
[134] They had to rebuild part of it because of a squeezing ground conditions.
[135] Geology is always challenging in tunneling. You think you know everything about it, there is still surprises.
[136] Now, we should clarify that obviously the TBMs won't actually physically touch each other when they both eventually get to the middle. It could be quite messy
# Other Benefits

[137] if they did.
[138] In fact, they're going to stop just before that point when it'll be time to dismantle and remove them.
[139] We should also explain something about the size of those TBMs. You might be wondering why they need to be so large
[140] when the biggest of things that's going to travel through here is trucks, and they're only about 4 m high at most.
[141] Well, the tunnel linings add around half a meter of thickness,
[142] but it's more to do with what's going above and below the road.
[143] On top, there's going to be space for ventilation,
[144] and underneath there'll be a set of service ducts.
[145] One's going to carry all the utilities for maintaining the tunnel, which is hardly a surprise.
[146] But the other is going to have high-voltage power lines running through it.
[147] That hasn't been done anywhere else in Europe, and it's going to replace the line that's now spread over the Gotthard Pass on big pylons, which isn't much to look at.
[148] Another clever idea is what they're doing with the excavated material, which amounts to almost 7 and 1/2 million tons overall.
[149] Around a quarter of the stuff is going back into the concrete mix for the same projects, as well as the restoration of the old tunnel.
[150] A further quarter is going to be used for road surfaces.
[151] The remaining half is going to be sent back to Lake Lucerne, about 50 km north of Göschenen.
# The Traffic Issue

[152] There, it's going to be used to make shallow water zones, creating new habitats for plants and animals.
[153] It sounds great, but let's get back to the earlier point for a second.
[154] We said before that adding this second tunnel won't boost capacity, which might sound a bit strange.
[155] Although traffic is going to be split across two tubes instead of one, it doesn't mean there's going to be twice as much traffic coming through here.
[156] Instead, there's going to be one tunnel for each direction, which is better than things are now, where cars pass each other head-on in the same quite small space.
[157] But in the new tunnels, the cars are still going to be traveling single file with the other lane reserved as a hard shoulder or an emergency lane.
[158] The idea of that is to make the tunnels overall more safer and more reliable, which you can't really argue with.
[159] And that's because they're not actually allowed to make this road any busier.
[160] Article 84 of the Swiss Federal Constitution states that the capacity of transport routes in the Alpine region may not be increased.
[161] It means the congestion often seen around the existing tunnel probably won't go away once the new one opens.
[162] In 2025, queues stretching for several kilometers were reported multiple times.
[163] So, some might feel this new tunnel won't actually make much of a difference if it doesn't fix the traffic.
[164] But others would argue it's about more than that, namely ensuring this vital artery of Europe's transport system doesn't come to a complete standstill,
[165] even if this giant machine that's so crucial to its completion is doing just that for the time being.
[166] The Swiss population has choose for this second tunnel, and we have the responsibility to do it.
[167] I think it's the biggest project now in Switzerland.
[168] Also, the people they they work there, the construction company, they are all proud to to work for for this project, and we are also proud to to work for this project.
[169] As always, if you enjoyed this video and you want to get more from the definitive video channel for construction, make sure you subscribe to the B1M.